docs/src/main/asciidoc/azure-functions-http.adoc, before:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Azure Functions (Serverless) with RESTEasy, Undertow, or Vert.x Web
:extension-status: preview

include::./attributes.adoc[]

The `quarkus-azure-functions-http` extension allows you to write microservices with RESTEasy (JAX-RS),
Undertow (servlet), Vert.x Web, or link:funqy-http[Funqy HTTP] and make these microservices deployable to the Azure Functions runtime.

One azure function deployment can represent any number of JAX-RS, servlet, Vert.x Web, or link:funqy-http[Funqy HTTP] endpoints.

include::./status-include.adoc[]

NOTE: Only text based media types are supported at the moment as Azure Functions HTTP Trigger for Java does not support a binary format

== Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need:

* less than 15 minutes
* JDK 11 (Azure requires JDK 1.8 or 11)
* Apache Maven {maven-version}
* https://azure.microsoft.com[An Azure Account].  Free accounts work.
* https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli[Azure CLI Installed]

== Solution

This guide walks you through running a Maven Archetype to generate a sample project that contains three http endpoints
written with JAX-RS APIs, Servlet APIs, Vert.x Web, or link:funqy-http[Funqy HTTP] APIs.  After building, you will then be able to deploy
to Azure.

== Creating the Maven Deployment Project

Create the azure maven project for your Quarkus application using our Maven Archetype.


[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn archetype:generate \
    -DarchetypeGroupId=io.quarkus \
    -DarchetypeArtifactId=quarkus-azure-functions-http-archetype \
    -DarchetypeVersion={quarkus-version}
----

Running this command will run maven in interactive mode and it will ask you to fill in some build properties:

* `groupId` - The maven groupId of this generated project.  Type in `org.acme`.
* `artifactId` - The maven artifactId of this generated project. Type in `quarkus-demo`
* `version` - Version of this generated project.
* `package` - defaults to `groupId`
* `appName` - Use the default value.  This is the application name in Azure.  It must be a unique subdomain name under `*.azurewebsites.net`. Otherwise deploying to Azure will fail.
* `appRegion` - Defaults to `westus`.  Dependent on your azure region.
* `function` - Use the default which is `quarkus`.  Name of your azure function. Can be anything you want.
* `resourceGroup` - Use the default value.  Any value is fine though.

The values above are defined as properties in the generated `pom.xml` file.

== Login to Azure

If you don't login to Azure you won't be able to deploy.

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
az login
----

== Build and Deploy to Azure

The `pom.xml` you generated in the previous step pulls in the `azure-functions-maven-plugin`.  Running maven install
generates config files and a staging directory required by the `azure-functions-maven-plugin`.  Here's
how to execute it.

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
./mvnw clean install azure-functions:deploy
----

If you haven't already created your function up at azure, the will build an uber-jar, package it, create the function
at Azure, and deploy it.

If deployment is a success, the azure plugin will tell you the base URL to access your function.

i.e.
[source]
----
Successfully deployed the artifact to https://quarkus-demo-123451234.azurewebsites.net
----

The URL to access the service would be

https://{appName}.azurewebsites.net/api/hello
https://{appName}.azurewebsites.net/api/servlet/hello
https://{appName}.azurewebsites.net/api/vertx/hello
https://{appName}.azurewebsites.net/api/funqyHello

== Extension maven dependencies

The sample project includes the RESTEasy, Undertow, Vert.x Web, link:funqy-http[Funqy HTTP] extensions.  If you are only using one of those
APIs (i.e. jax-rs only), respectively remove the maven dependency `quarkus-resteasy`, `quarkus-undertow`, `quarkus-funqy-http`, and/or
`quarkus-reactive-routes`.

You must include the `quarkus-azure-functions-http` extension as this is a generic bridge between the Azure Functions
runtime and the HTTP framework you are writing your microservices in.

== Azure Deployment Descriptors

Templates for Azure Functions deployment descriptors (`host.json`, `function.json`) are within
the `azure-config` directory.  Edit them as you need to.  Rerun the build when you are ready.

*NOTE*: If you change the `function.json` `path` attribute or if you add a `routePrefix`,
your jax-rs endpoints won't route correctly.  See <<config-azure-paths>> for more information.


[#config-azure-paths]
== Configuring Root Paths

The default route prefix for an Azure Function is `/api`.  All of your JAX-RS, Servlet, Vert.x Web, and link:funqy-http[Funqy HTTP] endpoints must
explicitly take this into account.  In the generated project this is handled by the
`quarkus.http.root-path` switch in `application.properties`

If you modify the `path` or add a `routePrefix` within the `azure-config/function.json`
deployment descriptor, your code or configuration must also reflect any prefixes you specify for your path.

Commit message:

Rename vertx-web to reactive-routes

docs/src/main/asciidoc/azure-functions-http.adoc, after:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Azure Functions (Serverless) with RESTEasy, Undertow, or Reactive Routes
:extension-status: preview

include::./attributes.adoc[]

The `quarkus-azure-functions-http` extension allows you to write microservices with RESTEasy (JAX-RS),
Undertow (servlet), Reactive Routes, or link:funqy-http[Funqy HTTP] and make these microservices deployable to the Azure Functions runtime.

One azure function deployment can represent any number of JAX-RS, servlet, Reactive Routes, or link:funqy-http[Funqy HTTP] endpoints.

include::./status-include.adoc[]

NOTE: Only text based media types are supported at the moment as Azure Functions HTTP Trigger for Java does not support a binary format

== Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need:

* less than 15 minutes
* JDK 11 (Azure requires JDK 1.8 or 11)
* Apache Maven {maven-version}
* https://azure.microsoft.com[An Azure Account].  Free accounts work.
* https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli[Azure CLI Installed]

== Solution

This guide walks you through running a Maven Archetype to generate a sample project that contains three http endpoints
written with JAX-RS APIs, Servlet APIs, Reactive Routes, or link:funqy-http[Funqy HTTP] APIs.  After building, you will then be able to deploy
to Azure.

== Creating the Maven Deployment Project

Create the azure maven project for your Quarkus application using our Maven Archetype.


[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn archetype:generate \
    -DarchetypeGroupId=io.quarkus \
    -DarchetypeArtifactId=quarkus-azure-functions-http-archetype \
    -DarchetypeVersion={quarkus-version}
----

Running this command will run maven in interactive mode and it will ask you to fill in some build properties:

* `groupId` - The maven groupId of this generated project.  Type in `org.acme`.
* `artifactId` - The maven artifactId of this generated project. Type in `quarkus-demo`
* `version` - Version of this generated project.
* `package` - defaults to `groupId`
* `appName` - Use the default value.  This is the application name in Azure.  It must be a unique subdomain name under `*.azurewebsites.net`. Otherwise deploying to Azure will fail.
* `appRegion` - Defaults to `westus`.  Dependent on your azure region.
* `function` - Use the default which is `quarkus`.  Name of your azure function. Can be anything you want.
* `resourceGroup` - Use the default value.  Any value is fine though.

The values above are defined as properties in the generated `pom.xml` file.

== Login to Azure

If you don't login to Azure you won't be able to deploy.

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
az login
----

== Build and Deploy to Azure

The `pom.xml` you generated in the previous step pulls in the `azure-functions-maven-plugin`.  Running maven install
generates config files and a staging directory required by the `azure-functions-maven-plugin`.  Here's
how to execute it.

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
./mvnw clean install azure-functions:deploy
----

If you haven't already created your function up at azure, the will build an uber-jar, package it, create the function
at Azure, and deploy it.

If deployment is a success, the azure plugin will tell you the base URL to access your function.

i.e.
[source]
----
Successfully deployed the artifact to https://quarkus-demo-123451234.azurewebsites.net
----

The URL to access the service would be

https://{appName}.azurewebsites.net/api/hello
https://{appName}.azurewebsites.net/api/servlet/hello
https://{appName}.azurewebsites.net/api/vertx/hello
https://{appName}.azurewebsites.net/api/funqyHello

== Extension maven dependencies

The sample project includes the RESTEasy, Undertow, Reactive Routes, link:funqy-http[Funqy HTTP] extensions.  If you are only using one of those
APIs (i.e. jax-rs only), respectively remove the maven dependency `quarkus-resteasy`, `quarkus-undertow`, `quarkus-funqy-http`, and/or
`quarkus-reactive-routes`.

You must include the `quarkus-azure-functions-http` extension as this is a generic bridge between the Azure Functions
runtime and the HTTP framework you are writing your microservices in.

== Azure Deployment Descriptors

Templates for Azure Functions deployment descriptors (`host.json`, `function.json`) are within
the `azure-config` directory.  Edit them as you need to.  Rerun the build when you are ready.

*NOTE*: If you change the `function.json` `path` attribute or if you add a `routePrefix`,
your jax-rs endpoints won't route correctly.  See <<config-azure-paths>> for more information.


[#config-azure-paths]
== Configuring Root Paths

The default route prefix for an Azure Function is `/api`.  All of your JAX-RS, Servlet, Reactive Routes, and link:funqy-http[Funqy HTTP] endpoints must
explicitly take this into account.  In the generated project this is handled by the
`quarkus.http.root-path` switch in `application.properties`

If you modify the `path` or add a `routePrefix` within the `azure-config/function.json`
deployment descriptor, your code or configuration must also reflect any prefixes you specify for your path.
