docs/src/main/asciidoc/continuous-testing.adoc, before:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Continuous Testing

include::./attributes.adoc[]

:toc: macro
:toclevels: 4
:doctype: book
:icons: font
:docinfo1:

:numbered:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4

Learn how to use continuous testing in your Quarkus Application.

== Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need:

* less than 15 minutes
* an IDE
* JDK 11+ installed with `JAVA_HOME` configured appropriately
* Apache Maven {maven-version}
* The completed greeter application from the link:getting-started[Getting Started Guide]

== Introduction

Quarkus supports continuous testing, where tests run immediately after code changes have been saved. This allows you to
get instant feedback on your code changes. Quarkus detects which tests cover which code, and uses this information to
only run the relevant tests when code is changed.

== Solution

Start the link:getting-started[Getting Started] application (or any other application) using `mvn quarkus:dev`. Quarkus
will start in development mode as normal, but down the bottom of the screen you should see the following:

[source]
----
--
Tests paused, press [r] to resume
----

Press `r` and the tests will start running. You should see the status change down the bottom of the screen as they
are running, and it should finish with:

[source]
----
--
Tests all passed, 2 tests were run, 0 were skipped. Tests took 1470ms.
Press [r] to re-run, [v] to view full results, [p] to pause, [h] for more options>
----


NOTE: If you want continuous testing to start automatically you can set `quarkus.test.continuous-testing=enabled` in
`application.properties`. If you don't want it at all you can change this to `disabled`.


Now you can start making changes to your application. Go into the `GreetingResource` and change the hello endpoint to
return `"hello world"`, and save the file. Quarkus should immediately re-run the test, and you should get output similar
to the following:

[source]
----
2021-05-11 14:21:34,338 ERROR [io.qua.test] (Test runner thread) Test GreetingResourceTest#testHelloEndpoint() failed
: java.lang.AssertionError: 1 expectation failed.
Response body doesn't match expectation.
Expected: is "hello"
  Actual: hello world

	at io.restassured.internal.ValidatableResponseImpl.body(ValidatableResponseImpl.groovy)
	at org.acme.getting.started.GreetingResourceTest.testHelloEndpoint(GreetingResourceTest.java:21)


--
Test run failed, 2 tests were run, 1 failed, 0 were skipped. Tests took 295ms
Press [r] to re-run, [v] to view full results, [p] to pause, [h] for more options>
----

Change it back and the tests will run again.

== Controlling Continuous Testing

There are various hotkeys you can use to control continuous testing. Pressing `h` will display the following list
of commands:

[source]
----
The following commands are available:
[r] - Re-run all tests
[f] - Re-run failed tests
[b] - Toggle 'broken only' mode, where only failing tests are run (disabled)
[v] - Print failures from the last test run
[o] - Toggle test output (disabled)
[p] - Pause tests
[i] - Toggle instrumentation based reload (disabled)
[l] - Toggle live reload (enabled)
[s] - Force live reload scan
[h] - Display this help
----

These are explained below:

[r] - Re-run all tests::
This will re-run every test

[f] - Re-run failed tests::
This will re-run every failing test

[b] - Toggle 'broken only' mode, where only failing tests are run::
Broken only mode will only run tests that have previously failed, even if other tests would normally be affected by a code
change. This can be useful if you are modifying code that is used by lots of tests, but you only want to focus on debugging
the failing one.

[v] - Print failures from the last test run::
Prints the failures to the console again, this can be useful if there has been lots of console output since the last run.

[o] - Toggle test output::
By default test output is filtered and not displayed on the console, so that test output and dev mode output is not
interleaved. Enabling test output will print output to the console when tests are run. Even when output is disabled
the filtered output is saved and can be viewed in the Dev UI.

[p] - Pause tests::
Temporarily stops running tests. This can be useful if you are making lots of changes, and don't want feedback until they
are all done.

[i] - Toggle instrumentation based reload::
This is not directly related to testing, but allows you to toggle instrumentation based reload. This will allow live reload
to avoid a restart if a change does not affect the structure of a class, which gives a faster reload and allows you to keep
state.

[l] - Toggle live reload::
This is not directly related to testing, but allows you to turn live reload on and off.

[s] - Force live reload scan::
This will force a scan for changed file, and will perform a live reload if anything has changed. This will still work even
if live reload is disabled.

== Continuous Testing Without Dev Mode

It is possible to run continous testing without starting dev mode. This can be useful if dev mode will interfere with
your tests (e.g. running wiremock on the same port), or if you only want to develop using tests. To start continuous testing
mode run `mvn quarkus:test`.

NOTE: The Dev UI is not available when running in continuous testing mode, as this is provided by dev mode.

== Configuring Continuous Testing

Continuous testing supports multiple configuration options that can be used to limit the tests that are run, and
to control the output. The configuration properties are shown below:

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-test-dev-testing-test-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+2]

Commit message:

Move console config out of testing
This can be used for more than just testing now.

(cherry picked from commit 3636a3ad9e13bcd121bee8d0e3599ab3ce41a286)

docs/src/main/asciidoc/continuous-testing.adoc, after:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Continuous Testing

include::./attributes.adoc[]

:toc: macro
:toclevels: 4
:doctype: book
:icons: font
:docinfo1:

:numbered:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4

Learn how to use continuous testing in your Quarkus Application.

== Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need:

* less than 15 minutes
* an IDE
* JDK 11+ installed with `JAVA_HOME` configured appropriately
* Apache Maven {maven-version}
* The completed greeter application from the link:getting-started[Getting Started Guide]

== Introduction

Quarkus supports continuous testing, where tests run immediately after code changes have been saved. This allows you to
get instant feedback on your code changes. Quarkus detects which tests cover which code, and uses this information to
only run the relevant tests when code is changed.

== Solution

Start the link:getting-started[Getting Started] application (or any other application) using `mvn quarkus:dev`. Quarkus
will start in development mode as normal, but down the bottom of the screen you should see the following:

[source]
----
--
Tests paused, press [r] to resume, [h] for more options>
----

Press `r` and the tests will start running. You should see the status change down the bottom of the screen as they
are running, and it should finish with:

[source]
----
--
Tests all passed, 2 tests were run, 0 were skipped. Tests took 1470ms.
Press [r] to re-run, [v] to view full results, [p] to pause, [h] for more options>
----


NOTE: If you want continuous testing to start automatically you can set `quarkus.test.continuous-testing=enabled` in
`application.properties`. If you don't want it at all you can change this to `disabled`.


Now you can start making changes to your application. Go into the `GreetingResource` and change the hello endpoint to
return `"hello world"`, and save the file. Quarkus should immediately re-run the test, and you should get output similar
to the following:

[source]
----
2021-05-11 14:21:34,338 ERROR [io.qua.test] (Test runner thread) Test GreetingResourceTest#testHelloEndpoint() failed
: java.lang.AssertionError: 1 expectation failed.
Response body doesn't match expectation.
Expected: is "hello"
  Actual: hello world

	at io.restassured.internal.ValidatableResponseImpl.body(ValidatableResponseImpl.groovy)
	at org.acme.getting.started.GreetingResourceTest.testHelloEndpoint(GreetingResourceTest.java:21)


--
Test run failed, 2 tests were run, 1 failed, 0 were skipped. Tests took 295ms
Press [r] to re-run, [v] to view full results, [p] to pause, [h] for more options>
----

Change it back and the tests will run again.

== Controlling Continuous Testing

There are various hotkeys you can use to control continuous testing. Pressing `h` will display the following list
of commands:

[source]
----
The following commands are available:
[r] - Re-run all tests
[f] - Re-run failed tests
[b] - Toggle 'broken only' mode, where only failing tests are run (disabled)
[v] - Print failures from the last test run
[p] - Pause tests
[o] - Toggle test output (disabled)
[i] - Toggle instrumentation based reload (disabled)
[l] - Toggle live reload (enabled)
[s] - Force restart with any changes
[h] - Display this help
[q] - Quit
----

These are explained below:

[r] - Re-run all tests::
This will re-run every test

[f] - Re-run failed tests::
This will re-run every failing test

[b] - Toggle 'broken only' mode, where only failing tests are run::
Broken only mode will only run tests that have previously failed, even if other tests would normally be affected by a code
change. This can be useful if you are modifying code that is used by lots of tests, but you only want to focus on debugging
the failing one.

[v] - Print failures from the last test run::
Prints the failures to the console again, this can be useful if there has been lots of console output since the last run.

[p] - Pause tests::
Temporarily stops running tests. This can be useful if you are making lots of changes, and don't want feedback until they
are all done.

[o] - Toggle test output::
By default test output is filtered and not displayed on the console, so that test output and dev mode output is not
interleaved. Enabling test output will print output to the console when tests are run. Even when output is disabled
the filtered output is saved and can be viewed in the Dev UI.

[i] - Toggle instrumentation based reload::
This is not directly related to testing, but allows you to toggle instrumentation based reload. This will allow live reload
to avoid a restart if a change does not affect the structure of a class, which gives a faster reload and allows you to keep
state.

[l] - Toggle live reload::
This is not directly related to testing, but allows you to turn live reload on and off.

[s] - Force restart with any changes::
This will force a scan for changed file, and will perform a live reload if anything has changed. This will still work even
if live reload is disabled.

== Continuous Testing Without Dev Mode

It is possible to run continuous testing without starting dev mode. This can be useful if dev mode will interfere with
your tests (e.g. running wiremock on the same port), or if you only want to develop using tests. To start continuous testing
mode run `mvn quarkus:test`.

NOTE: The Dev UI is not available when running in continuous testing mode, as this is provided by dev mode.

== Configuring Continuous Testing

Continuous testing supports multiple configuration options that can be used to limit the tests that are run, and
to control the output. The configuration properties are shown below:

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-test-dev-testing-test-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+2]
