docs/src/main/asciidoc/dev-services.adoc, before:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Dev Services Overview

include::./attributes.adoc[]

Quarkus supports the automatic provisioning of unconfigured services in development and test mode. We refer to this capability
as Dev Services. From a developer's perspective this means that if you include an extension and don't configure it then
Quarkus will automatically start the relevant service (usually using https://www.testcontainers.org/[Testcontainers] behind the scenes) and wire up your
application to use this service.

All this functionality is part of the Quarkus `deployment` modules, so does not affect the production application in any
way. If you want to disable all Dev Services you can use the `quarkus.devservices.enabled=false` config property, although
in most cases this is not necessary as simply configuring the service will result in the Dev Service being disabled automatically.

This page lists all the Dev Services that Quarkus supports.

NOTE: In order to use Dev Services you will generally need a working Docker environment (remote environments are supported).
If you don't have Docker installed you will need to configure your services normally.

== AMQP

The AMQP Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-smallrye-reactive-messaging-amqp` extension is present in your application, and
the broker address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:amqp-dev-services[AMQP Dev Services Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-smallrye-reactivemessaging-amqp-config-group-amqp-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Apicurio Registry

The Apicurio Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-apicurio-registry-avro` extension is present in your application, and it's
address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:apicurio-registry-dev-services[Apicurio Registry Dev Services Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-apicurio-registry-devservices-apicurio-registry-avro-apicurio-registry-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Databases

The database Dev Services will be enabled when a reactive or JDBC datasource extension is present in the application,
and the database URL has not been configured. More information can be found at the
link:datasource#dev-services[Datasource Guide].

Quarkus provides Dev Services for all databases it supports except Oracle. Most of these are run in a container, with the
exception of H2 and Derby which are run in process. Dev Services are supported for both JDBC and reactive drivers.

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-datasource-config-group-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Kafka

The Kafka Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-kafka-client` extension is present in your application, and
the broker address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:kafka-dev-services[Kafka Dev Services Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-kafka-client-config-group-kafka-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Keycloak

The Keycloak Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-oidc` extension is present in your application, and
the server address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:security-openid-connect-dev-services[OIDC Dev Services Guide].

:no-duration-note: true
include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-keycloak-devservices-keycloak-keycloak-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== MongoDB

The MongoDB Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-mongodb-client` extension is present in your application, and
the server address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:mongodb#dev-services[MongoDB Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-mongodb-config-group-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== RabbitMQ

The RabbitMQ Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-smallrye-reactive-messaging-rabbitmq` extension is present in your application, and
the broker address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:rabbitmq-dev-services[RabbitMQ Dev Services Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-smallrye-reactivemessaging-rabbitmq-config-group-rabbitmq-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Redis

The Redis Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-redis-client` extension is present in your application, and
the server address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:redis-dev-services[Redis Dev Services Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-redis-client-config-group-dev-services-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Vault

The Vault Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-vault` extension is present in your application, and
the server address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:vault#dev-services[Vault Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vault-config-group-config-dev-services-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]


== Neo4j

The Neo4j Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-neo4j` extension is present in your application, and
the server address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:neo4j#dev-services[Neo4j Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-neo4j-config-group-config-dev-services-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]


== Infinispan

The Infinispan Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-infinispan-client` extension is present in your application, and
the server address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:infinispan-client#dev-services[Infinispan Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-infinispan-client-config-group-config-dev-services-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

Commit message:

Add ability to configure DevServices timeouts
Fixes #21084

docs/src/main/asciidoc/dev-services.adoc, after:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Dev Services Overview

include::./attributes.adoc[]

Quarkus supports the automatic provisioning of unconfigured services in development and test mode. We refer to this capability
as Dev Services. From a developer's perspective this means that if you include an extension and don't configure it then
Quarkus will automatically start the relevant service (usually using https://www.testcontainers.org/[Testcontainers] behind the scenes) and wire up your
application to use this service.

All this functionality is part of the Quarkus `deployment` modules, so does not affect the production application in any
way. If you want to disable all Dev Services you can use the `quarkus.devservices.enabled=false` config property, although
in most cases this is not necessary as simply configuring the service will result in the Dev Service being disabled automatically.

Note that the default startup timeout is 60s, if this is not enough you can increase it with the `quarkus.devservices.timeout` property.


This page lists all the Dev Services that Quarkus supports.

NOTE: In order to use Dev Services you will generally need a working Docker environment (remote environments are supported).
If you don't have Docker installed you will need to configure your services normally.

== AMQP

The AMQP Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-smallrye-reactive-messaging-amqp` extension is present in your application, and
the broker address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:amqp-dev-services[AMQP Dev Services Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-smallrye-reactivemessaging-amqp-config-group-amqp-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Apicurio Registry

The Apicurio Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-apicurio-registry-avro` extension is present in your application, and it's
address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:apicurio-registry-dev-services[Apicurio Registry Dev Services Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-apicurio-registry-devservices-apicurio-registry-avro-apicurio-registry-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Databases

The database Dev Services will be enabled when a reactive or JDBC datasource extension is present in the application,
and the database URL has not been configured. More information can be found at the
link:datasource#dev-services[Datasource Guide].

Quarkus provides Dev Services for all databases it supports except Oracle. Most of these are run in a container, with the
exception of H2 and Derby which are run in process. Dev Services are supported for both JDBC and reactive drivers.

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-datasource-config-group-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Kafka

The Kafka Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-kafka-client` extension is present in your application, and
the broker address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:kafka-dev-services[Kafka Dev Services Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-kafka-client-config-group-kafka-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Keycloak

The Keycloak Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-oidc` extension is present in your application, and
the server address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:security-openid-connect-dev-services[OIDC Dev Services Guide].

:no-duration-note: true
include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-keycloak-devservices-keycloak-keycloak-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== MongoDB

The MongoDB Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-mongodb-client` extension is present in your application, and
the server address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:mongodb#dev-services[MongoDB Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-mongodb-config-group-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== RabbitMQ

The RabbitMQ Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-smallrye-reactive-messaging-rabbitmq` extension is present in your application, and
the broker address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:rabbitmq-dev-services[RabbitMQ Dev Services Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-smallrye-reactivemessaging-rabbitmq-config-group-rabbitmq-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Redis

The Redis Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-redis-client` extension is present in your application, and
the server address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:redis-dev-services[Redis Dev Services Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-redis-client-config-group-dev-services-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Vault

The Vault Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-vault` extension is present in your application, and
the server address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:vault#dev-services[Vault Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vault-config-group-config-dev-services-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]


== Neo4j

The Neo4j Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-neo4j` extension is present in your application, and
the server address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:neo4j#dev-services[Neo4j Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-neo4j-config-group-config-dev-services-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]


== Infinispan

The Infinispan Dev Service will be enabled when the `quarkus-infinispan-client` extension is present in your application, and
the server address has not been explicitly configured. More information can be found at the
link:infinispan-client#dev-services[Infinispan Guide].

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-infinispan-client-config-group-config-dev-services-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]
