docs/src/main/asciidoc/grpc-service-implementation.adoc, before:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Implementing a gRPC Service

include::./attributes.adoc[]

gRPC service implementations exposed as CDI beans are automatically registered and served by quarkus-grpc.

IMPORTANT: Implementing a gRPC service requires the gRPC classes to be generated.
Place your `proto` files in `src/main/proto` and run `mvn compile`.

== Generated Code

Quarkus generates a few implementation classes for services declared in the `proto` file:

1. A _service interface_ using the Mutiny API
  - the class name is `${JAVA_PACKAGE}.${NAME_OF_THE_SERVICE}`
2. An _implementation base_ class using the gRPC API
  - the class name is structured as follows: `${JAVA_PACKAGE}.${NAME_OF_THE_SERVICE}Grpc.${NAME_OF_THE_SERVICE}ImplBase`

For example, if you use the following `proto` file snippet:

[source]
----
option java_package = "hello"; <1>

service Greeter { <2>
    rpc SayHello (HelloRequest) returns (HelloReply) {}
}
----
<1> `hello` is the java package for the generated classes.
<2> `Greeter` is the service name.

Then the service interface is `hello.Greeter` and the implementation base is the abstract static nested class: `hello.GreeterGrpc.GreeterImplBase`.

IMPORTANT: You'll need to implement the _service interface_ or extend the _base class_ with your service implementation bean as described in the following sections.

== Implementing a Service with the Mutiny API

To implement a gRPC service using the Mutiny API, create a class that implements the service interface.
Then, implement the methods defined in the service interface.
If you don't want to implement a service method just throw an `java.lang.UnsupportedOperationException` from the method body (the exception will be automatically converted to the appropriate gRPC exception).
Finally, implement the service and add the `@GrpcService` annotation:

[source, java]
----
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService;
import hello.Greeter;

@GrpcService <1>
public class HelloService implements Greeter { <2>

    @Override
    public Uni<HelloReply> sayHello(HelloRequest request) {
        return Uni.createFrom().item(() ->
                HelloReply.newBuilder().setMessage("Hello " + request.getName()).build()
        );
    }
}
----
<1> A gRPC service implementation bean must be annotated with the `@GrpcService` annotation and should not declare any other CDI qualifier. All gRPC services have the `javax.inject.Singleton` scope. Additionally, the request context is always active during a service call.
<2> `hello.Greeter` is the generated service interface.

NOTE: The service implementation bean can also extend the Mutiny implementation base, where the class name is structured as follows: `Mutiny${NAME_OF_THE_SERVICE}Grpc.${NAME_OF_THE_SERVICE}ImplBase`.

== Implementing a Service with the default gRPC API

To implement a gRPC service using the default gRPC API, create a class that extends the default implementation base.
Then, override the methods defined in the service interface.
Finally, implement the service and add the `@GrpcService` annotation:

[source, java]
----
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService;

@GrpcService
public class HelloService extends GreeterGrpc.GreeterImplBase {

    @Override
    public void sayHello(HelloRequest request, StreamObserver<HelloReply> responseObserver) {
        String name = request.getName();
        String message = "Hello " + name;
        responseObserver.onNext(HelloReply.newBuilder().setMessage(message).build());
        responseObserver.onCompleted();
    }
}
----

== Blocking Service Implementation

By default, all the methods from a gRPC service run on the event loop.
As a consequence, you must **not** block.
If your service logic must block, annotate the method with `io.smallrye.common.annotation.Blocking`:

[source, java]
----
@Override
@Blocking
public Uni<HelloReply> sayHelloBlocking(HelloRequest request) {
    // Do something blocking before returning the Uni
}
----

== Handling Streams

gRPC allows receiving and returning streams:

[source]
----
service Streaming {
    rpc Source(Empty) returns (stream Item) {} // Returns a stream
    rpc Sink(stream Item) returns (Empty) {}   // Reads a stream
    rpc Pipe(stream Item) returns (stream Item) {}  // Reads a streams and return a streams
}
----

Using Mutiny, you can implement these as follows:

[source, java]
----
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService;

@GrpcService
public class StreamingService implements Streaming {

    @Override
    public Multi<Item> source(Empty request) {
        // Just returns a stream emitting an item every 2ms and stopping after 10 items.
        return Multi.createFrom().ticks().every(Duration.ofMillis(2))
                .select().first(10)
                .map(l -> Item.newBuilder().setValue(Long.toString(l)).build());
    }

    @Override
    public Uni<Empty> sink(Multi<Item> request) {
        // Reads the incoming streams, consume all the items.
        return request
                .map(Item::getValue)
                .map(Long::parseLong)
                .collect().last()
                .map(l -> Empty.newBuilder().build());
    }

    @Override
    public Multi<Item> pipe(Multi<Item> request) {
        // Reads the incoming stream, compute a sum and return the cumulative results
        // in the outbound stream.
        return request
                .map(Item::getValue)
                .map(Long::parseLong)
                .onItem().scan(() -> 0L, Long::sum)
                .onItem().transform(l -> Item.newBuilder().setValue(Long.toString(l)).build());
    }
}
----

== Health Check
For the implemented services, Quarkus gRPC exposes health information in the following format:
[source,protobuf]
----
syntax = "proto3";

package grpc.health.v1;

message HealthCheckRequest {
  string service = 1;
}

message HealthCheckResponse {
  enum ServingStatus {
    UNKNOWN = 0;
    SERVING = 1;
    NOT_SERVING = 2;
  }
  ServingStatus status = 1;
}

service Health {
  rpc Check(HealthCheckRequest) returns (HealthCheckResponse);

  rpc Watch(HealthCheckRequest) returns (stream HealthCheckResponse);
}
----

Clients can specify the fully qualified service name to get the health status of a specific service
or skip specifying the service name to get the general status of the gRPC server.

For more details, check out the
https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/v1.28.1/doc/health-checking.md[gRPC documentation]

Additionally, if Quarkus SmallRye Health is added to the application, a readiness check for
the state of the gRPC services will be added to the MicroProfile Health endpoint response, that is `/q/health`.

== Reflection Service

Quarkus gRPC Server implements the https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/server-reflection.md[reflection service].
This service allows tools like https://github.com/fullstorydev/grpcurl[grpcurl] or https://github.com/gusaul/grpcox[grpcox] to interact with your services.

The reflection service is enabled by default in _dev_ mode.
In test or production mode, you need to enable it explicitly by setting `quarkus.grpc.server.enable-reflection-service` to `true`.

== Scaling
By default, quarkus-grpc starts a single gRPC server running on a single event loop.

If you wish to scale your server, you can set the number of server instances by setting `quarkus.grpc.server.instances`.

== Server Configuration

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-grpc-config-group-config-grpc-server-configuration.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Example of Configuration

=== Enabling TLS

To enable TLS, use the following configuration.

Note that all paths in the configuration may either specify a resource on the classpath
(typically from `src/main/resources` or its subfolder) or an external file.

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.certificate=tls/server.pem
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.key=tls/server.key
----

NOTE: When SSL/TLS is configured, `plain-text` is automatically disabled.

=== TLS with Mutual Auth

To use TLS with mutual authentication, use the following configuration:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.certificate=tls/server.pem
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.key=tls/server.key
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.trust-store=tls/ca.jks
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.trust-store-password=*****
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.client-auth=REQUIRED
----

== Server Interceptors

You can implement a gRPC server interceptor by implementing an `@ApplicationScoped` bean implementing `io.grpc.ServerInterceptor`:

[source, java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class MyInterceptor implements ServerInterceptor {

    @Override
    public <ReqT, RespT> ServerCall.Listener<ReqT> interceptCall(ServerCall<ReqT, RespT> serverCall,
            Metadata metadata, ServerCallHandler<ReqT, RespT> serverCallHandler) {
        // ...
    }
}
----

TIP: Check the https://grpc.github.io/grpc-java/javadoc/io/grpc/ServerInterceptor.html[ServerInterceptor JavaDoc] to properly implement your interceptor.

When you have multiple server interceptors, you can order them by implementing the `javax.enterprise.inject.spi.Prioritized` interface:

[source, java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class MyInterceptor implements ServerInterceptor, Prioritized {

    @Override
    public <ReqT, RespT> ServerCall.Listener<ReqT> interceptCall(ServerCall<ReqT, RespT> serverCall,
            Metadata metadata, ServerCallHandler<ReqT, RespT> serverCallHandler) {
        // ...
    }

    @Override
    public int getPriority() {
        return 10;
    }
}
----

Interceptors with the highest priority are called first.
The default priority, used if the interceptor does not implement the `Prioritized` interface, is `0`.


== Testing your services

The easiest way to test a gRPC service is to use a gRPC client as described
in link:grpc-service-consumption[Consuming a gRPC Service].

Please note that in the case of using a client to test an exposed service that does not use TLS,
there is no need to provide any configuration. E.g. to test the `HelloService`
defined above, one could create the following test:

[source,java]
----
public class HelloServiceTest implements Greeter {

    @GrpcClient
    Greeter client;

    @Test
    void shouldReturnHello() throws Exception {
        CompletableFuture<String> message = new CompletableFuture<>();
        client.sayHello(HelloRequest.newBuilder().setName("Quarkus").build())
                .subscribe().with(reply -> message.complete(reply.getMessage()));
        assertThat(message.get(5, TimeUnit.SECONDS)).isEqualTo("Hello Quarkus");
    }
}
----

Commit message:

gRPC: support per service interceptors
fixes #19229

docs/src/main/asciidoc/grpc-service-implementation.adoc, after:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Implementing a gRPC Service

include::./attributes.adoc[]

gRPC service implementations exposed as CDI beans are automatically registered and served by quarkus-grpc.

IMPORTANT: Implementing a gRPC service requires the gRPC classes to be generated.
Place your `proto` files in `src/main/proto` and run `mvn compile`.

== Generated Code

Quarkus generates a few implementation classes for services declared in the `proto` file:

1. A _service interface_ using the Mutiny API
  - the class name is `${JAVA_PACKAGE}.${NAME_OF_THE_SERVICE}`
2. An _implementation base_ class using the gRPC API
  - the class name is structured as follows: `${JAVA_PACKAGE}.${NAME_OF_THE_SERVICE}Grpc.${NAME_OF_THE_SERVICE}ImplBase`

For example, if you use the following `proto` file snippet:

[source]
----
option java_package = "hello"; <1>

service Greeter { <2>
    rpc SayHello (HelloRequest) returns (HelloReply) {}
}
----
<1> `hello` is the java package for the generated classes.
<2> `Greeter` is the service name.

Then the service interface is `hello.Greeter` and the implementation base is the abstract static nested class: `hello.GreeterGrpc.GreeterImplBase`.

IMPORTANT: You'll need to implement the _service interface_ or extend the _base class_ with your service implementation bean as described in the following sections.

== Implementing a Service with the Mutiny API

To implement a gRPC service using the Mutiny API, create a class that implements the service interface.
Then, implement the methods defined in the service interface.
If you don't want to implement a service method just throw an `java.lang.UnsupportedOperationException` from the method body (the exception will be automatically converted to the appropriate gRPC exception).
Finally, implement the service and add the `@GrpcService` annotation:

[source, java]
----
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService;
import hello.Greeter;

@GrpcService <1>
public class HelloService implements Greeter { <2>

    @Override
    public Uni<HelloReply> sayHello(HelloRequest request) {
        return Uni.createFrom().item(() ->
                HelloReply.newBuilder().setMessage("Hello " + request.getName()).build()
        );
    }
}
----
<1> A gRPC service implementation bean must be annotated with the `@GrpcService` annotation and should not declare any other CDI qualifier. All gRPC services have the `javax.inject.Singleton` scope. Additionally, the request context is always active during a service call.
<2> `hello.Greeter` is the generated service interface.

NOTE: The service implementation bean can also extend the Mutiny implementation base, where the class name is structured as follows: `Mutiny${NAME_OF_THE_SERVICE}Grpc.${NAME_OF_THE_SERVICE}ImplBase`.

== Implementing a Service with the default gRPC API

To implement a gRPC service using the default gRPC API, create a class that extends the default implementation base.
Then, override the methods defined in the service interface.
Finally, implement the service and add the `@GrpcService` annotation:

[source, java]
----
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService;

@GrpcService
public class HelloService extends GreeterGrpc.GreeterImplBase {

    @Override
    public void sayHello(HelloRequest request, StreamObserver<HelloReply> responseObserver) {
        String name = request.getName();
        String message = "Hello " + name;
        responseObserver.onNext(HelloReply.newBuilder().setMessage(message).build());
        responseObserver.onCompleted();
    }
}
----

== Blocking Service Implementation

By default, all the methods from a gRPC service run on the event loop.
As a consequence, you must **not** block.
If your service logic must block, annotate the method with `io.smallrye.common.annotation.Blocking`:

[source, java]
----
@Override
@Blocking
public Uni<HelloReply> sayHelloBlocking(HelloRequest request) {
    // Do something blocking before returning the Uni
}
----

== Handling Streams

gRPC allows receiving and returning streams:

[source]
----
service Streaming {
    rpc Source(Empty) returns (stream Item) {} // Returns a stream
    rpc Sink(stream Item) returns (Empty) {}   // Reads a stream
    rpc Pipe(stream Item) returns (stream Item) {}  // Reads a streams and return a streams
}
----

Using Mutiny, you can implement these as follows:

[source, java]
----
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService;

@GrpcService
public class StreamingService implements Streaming {

    @Override
    public Multi<Item> source(Empty request) {
        // Just returns a stream emitting an item every 2ms and stopping after 10 items.
        return Multi.createFrom().ticks().every(Duration.ofMillis(2))
                .select().first(10)
                .map(l -> Item.newBuilder().setValue(Long.toString(l)).build());
    }

    @Override
    public Uni<Empty> sink(Multi<Item> request) {
        // Reads the incoming streams, consume all the items.
        return request
                .map(Item::getValue)
                .map(Long::parseLong)
                .collect().last()
                .map(l -> Empty.newBuilder().build());
    }

    @Override
    public Multi<Item> pipe(Multi<Item> request) {
        // Reads the incoming stream, compute a sum and return the cumulative results
        // in the outbound stream.
        return request
                .map(Item::getValue)
                .map(Long::parseLong)
                .onItem().scan(() -> 0L, Long::sum)
                .onItem().transform(l -> Item.newBuilder().setValue(Long.toString(l)).build());
    }
}
----

== Health Check
For the implemented services, Quarkus gRPC exposes health information in the following format:
[source,protobuf]
----
syntax = "proto3";

package grpc.health.v1;

message HealthCheckRequest {
  string service = 1;
}

message HealthCheckResponse {
  enum ServingStatus {
    UNKNOWN = 0;
    SERVING = 1;
    NOT_SERVING = 2;
  }
  ServingStatus status = 1;
}

service Health {
  rpc Check(HealthCheckRequest) returns (HealthCheckResponse);

  rpc Watch(HealthCheckRequest) returns (stream HealthCheckResponse);
}
----

Clients can specify the fully qualified service name to get the health status of a specific service
or skip specifying the service name to get the general status of the gRPC server.

For more details, check out the
https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/v1.28.1/doc/health-checking.md[gRPC documentation]

Additionally, if Quarkus SmallRye Health is added to the application, a readiness check for
the state of the gRPC services will be added to the MicroProfile Health endpoint response, that is `/q/health`.

== Reflection Service

Quarkus gRPC Server implements the https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/server-reflection.md[reflection service].
This service allows tools like https://github.com/fullstorydev/grpcurl[grpcurl] or https://github.com/gusaul/grpcox[grpcox] to interact with your services.

The reflection service is enabled by default in _dev_ mode.
In test or production mode, you need to enable it explicitly by setting `quarkus.grpc.server.enable-reflection-service` to `true`.

== Scaling
By default, quarkus-grpc starts a single gRPC server running on a single event loop.

If you wish to scale your server, you can set the number of server instances by setting `quarkus.grpc.server.instances`.

== Server Configuration

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-grpc-config-group-config-grpc-server-configuration.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Example of Configuration

=== Enabling TLS

To enable TLS, use the following configuration.

Note that all paths in the configuration may either specify a resource on the classpath
(typically from `src/main/resources` or its subfolder) or an external file.

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.certificate=tls/server.pem
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.key=tls/server.key
----

NOTE: When SSL/TLS is configured, `plain-text` is automatically disabled.

=== TLS with Mutual Auth

To use TLS with mutual authentication, use the following configuration:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.certificate=tls/server.pem
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.key=tls/server.key
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.trust-store=tls/ca.jks
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.trust-store-password=*****
quarkus.grpc.server.ssl.client-auth=REQUIRED
----

== Server Interceptors

gRPC server interceptors let you perform logic, such as authentication, before your service is invoked.

You can implement a gRPC server interceptor by creating an `@ApplicationScoped` bean implementing `io.grpc.ServerInterceptor`:

[source, java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
// add @GlobalInterceptor for interceptors meant to be invoked for every service
public class MyInterceptor implements ServerInterceptor {

    @Override
    public <ReqT, RespT> ServerCall.Listener<ReqT> interceptCall(ServerCall<ReqT, RespT> serverCall,
            Metadata metadata, ServerCallHandler<ReqT, RespT> serverCallHandler) {
        // ...
    }
}
----

TIP: Check the https://grpc.github.io/grpc-java/javadoc/io/grpc/ServerInterceptor.html[ServerInterceptor JavaDoc] to properly implement your interceptor.

To apply an interceptor to all exposed services, annotate it with `@io.quarkus.grpc.GlobalInterceptor`.
To apply an interceptor to a single service, register it on the service with `@io.quarkus.grpc.RegisterInterceptor`:
[source, java]
----
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService;
import io.quarkus.grpc.RegisterInterceptor;

@GrpcService
@RegisterInterceptor(MyInterceptor.class)
public class StreamingService implements Streaming {
    // ...
}
----

When you have multiple server interceptors, you can order them by implementing the `javax.enterprise.inject.spi.Prioritized` interface. Please note that all the global interceptors are invoked before the service-specific
interceptors.

[source, java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class MyInterceptor implements ServerInterceptor, Prioritized {

    @Override
    public <ReqT, RespT> ServerCall.Listener<ReqT> interceptCall(ServerCall<ReqT, RespT> serverCall,
            Metadata metadata, ServerCallHandler<ReqT, RespT> serverCallHandler) {
        // ...
    }

    @Override
    public int getPriority() {
        return 10;
    }
}
----

Interceptors with the highest priority are called first.
The default priority, used if the interceptor does not implement the `Prioritized` interface, is `0`.


== Testing your services

The easiest way to test a gRPC service is to use a gRPC client as described
in link:grpc-service-consumption[Consuming a gRPC Service].

Please note that in the case of using a client to test an exposed service that does not use TLS,
there is no need to provide any configuration. E.g. to test the `HelloService`
defined above, one could create the following test:

[source,java]
----
public class HelloServiceTest implements Greeter {

    @GrpcClient
    Greeter client;

    @Test
    void shouldReturnHello() throws Exception {
        CompletableFuture<String> message = new CompletableFuture<>();
        client.sayHello(HelloRequest.newBuilder().setName("Quarkus").build())
                .subscribe().with(reply -> message.complete(reply.getMessage()));
        assertThat(message.get(5, TimeUnit.SECONDS)).isEqualTo("Hello Quarkus");
    }
}
----
