docs/src/main/asciidoc/grpc-getting-started.adoc, before:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Getting Started with gRPC

include::./attributes.adoc[]

This page explains how to start using gRPC in your Quarkus application.
While this page describes how to configure it with Maven, it is also possible to use Gradle.

Let's imagine you have a regular Quarkus project, generated from the https://code.quarkus.io[Quarkus project generator].
The default configuration is enough, but you can also select some extensions if you want.

== Solution

We recommend that you follow the instructions in the next sections and create the application step by step.
However, you can go right to the completed example.

Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}`, or download an {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive].

The solution is located in the `grpc-plain-text-quickstart` {quickstarts-tree-url}/grpc-plain-text-quickstart[directory].

== Configuring your project

Edit the `pom.xml` file to add the Quarkus gRPC extension dependency (just under `<dependencies>`):

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
  <artifactId>quarkus-grpc</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

Make sure you have `generate-code` goal of `quarkus-maven-plugin` enabled in your `pom.xml`.
If you wish to generate code from different `proto` files for tests, also add the `generate-code-tests` goal.
Please note that no additional task/goal is required for the Gradle plugin.

[source,xml]
----
<build>
    <plugins>
        <plugin>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-maven-plugin</artifactId>
            <version>${quarkus-plugin.version}</version>
            <extensions>true</extensions>
            <executions>
                <execution>
                    <goals>
                        <goal>build</goal>
                        <goal>generate-code</goal>
                        <goal>generate-code-tests</goal>
                    </goals>
                </execution>
            </executions>
        </plugin>
    </plugins>
</build>
----

With this configuration, you can put your service and message definitions in the `src/main/proto` directory.
`quarkus-maven-plugin` will generate Java files from your `proto` files.

`quarkus-maven-plugin` retrieves a version of `protoc` (the protobuf compiler) from Maven repositories. The retrieved version matches your operating system and CPU architecture.
If this retrieved version does not work in your context, you can download the suitable binary and specify the location via
`-Dquarkus.grpc.protoc-path=/path/to/protoc`.

Alternatively to using the `generate-code` goal of the `quarkus-maven-plugin`, you can use `protobuf-maven-plugin` to generate these files, more in <<Generating Java files from proto with protobuf-maven-plugin>>

Let's start with a simple _Hello_ service.
Create the `src/main/proto/helloworld.proto` file with the following content:

[source,javascript]
----
syntax = "proto3";

option java_multiple_files = true;
option java_package = "io.quarkus.example";
option java_outer_classname = "HelloWorldProto";

package helloworld;

// The greeting service definition.
service Greeter {
    // Sends a greeting
    rpc SayHello (HelloRequest) returns (HelloReply) {}
}

// The request message containing the user's name.
message HelloRequest {
    string name = 1;
}

// The response message containing the greetings
message HelloReply {
    string message = 1;
}
----

This `proto` file defines a simple service interface with a single method (`SayHello`), and the exchanged messages (`HelloRequest` containing the name and `HelloReply` containing the greeting message).

Before coding, we need to generate the classes used to implement and consume gRPC services.
In a terminal, run:

[source,shell]
----
$ mvn compile
----

Once generated, you can look at the `target/generated-sources/grpc` directory:

[source,txt]
----
target/generated-sources/grpc
└── io
    └── quarkus
        └── example
            ├── Greeter.java
            ├── GreeterBean.java
            ├── GreeterClient.java
            ├── GreeterGrpc.java
            ├── HelloReply.java
            ├── HelloReplyOrBuilder.java
            ├── HelloRequest.java
            ├── HelloRequestOrBuilder.java
            ├── HelloWorldProto.java
            └── MutinyGreeterGrpc.java
----

These are the classes we are going to use.


=== `proto` files with imports

Protocol Buffers specification provides a way to import `proto` files.
The Quarkus code generation mechanism lets you control the scope of dependencies to scan for possible imports by setting the `quarkus.generate-code.grpc.scan-for-imports` property to one of the following:

- `all` - scan all the dependencies
- `none` - don't scan the dependencies, use only what is defined in the `src/main/proto` or `src/test/proto`
- `groupId1:artifactId1,groupId2:artifactId2` - scan only the dependencies with group id and artifact id in the list.

If not specified, the property is set to `com.google.protobuf:protobuf-java`.
To override it, set the `quarkus.generate-code.grpc.scan-for-imports` property in your pom.xml (or gradle.properties) to the desired value, e.g.

[source,xml]
----
<properties>
  <quarkus.generate-code.grpc.scan-for-imports>all</quarkus.generate-code.grpc.scan-for-imports>
</properties>
----

== Implementing a gRPC service

Now that we have the generated classes let's implement our _hello_ service.

With Quarkus, implementing a service requires to implement the generated service interface based on Mutiny, a Reactive Programming API integrated in Quarkus, and expose it as a CDI bean. 
Learn more about Mutiny on the xref:mutiny-primer.adoc[Mutiny guide].
The service class must be annotated with the `@io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService` annotation.

=== Implementing a service

Create the `src/main/java/org/acme/HelloService.java` file with the following content:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme;

import io.grpc.stub.StreamObserver;
import io.quarkus.example.Greeter;
import io.quarkus.example.HelloReply;
import io.quarkus.example.HelloRequest;
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService;

@GrpcService <1>
public class HelloService implements Greeter {  <2>

    @Override
    public Uni<HelloReply> sayHello(HelloRequest request) { <3>
        return Uni.createFrom().item(() ->
                HelloReply.newBuilder().setMessage("Hello " + request.getName()).build()
        );
    }
}
----
<1> Expose your implementation as a bean.
<2> Implement the generated service interface.
<3> Implement the methods defined in the service definition (here we have a single method).

You can also use the default gRPC API instead of Mutiny:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme;

import io.grpc.stub.StreamObserver;
import io.quarkus.example.GreeterGrpc;
import io.quarkus.example.HelloReply;
import io.quarkus.example.HelloRequest;
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService;

@GrpcService <1>
public class HelloService extends GreeterGrpc.GreeterImplBase { <2>

    @Override
    public void sayHello(HelloRequest request, StreamObserver<HelloReply> responseObserver) { <3>
        String name = request.getName();
        String message = "Hello " + name;
        responseObserver.onNext(HelloReply.newBuilder().setMessage(message).build()); <4>
        responseObserver.onCompleted(); <5>
    }
}
----
<1> Expose your implementation as a bean.
<2> Extends the `ImplBase` class. This is a generated class.
<3> Implement the methods defined in the service definition (here we have a single method).
<4> Build and send the response.
<5> Close the response.

NOTE: If your service implementation logic is blocking (use blocking I/O for example), annotate your method with
`@Blocking`.
The `io.smallrye.common.annotation.Blocking` annotation instructs the framework to invoke the
annotated method on a worker thread instead of the I/O thread (event-loop).

=== The gRPC server

The services are _served_ by a _server_.
Available services (_CDI beans_) are automatically registered and exposed.

By default, the server is exposed on `localhost:9000`, and uses _plain-text_ (so no TLS) when
running normally, and `localhost:9001` for tests.

Run the application using: `mvn quarkus:dev`.

== Consuming a gRPC service

In this section, we are going to consume the service we expose.
To simplify, we are going to consume the service from the same application, which in the real world, does not make sense.

Open the existing `org.acme.ExampleResource` class, and edit the content to become:

[source, java]
----
package org.acme;

import io.quarkus.example.Greeter;
import io.quarkus.example.HelloRequest;
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcClient;

import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.PathParam;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/hello")
public class ExampleResource {

    @GrpcClient                               // <1>
    Greeter hello;                            // <2>

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String hello() {
        return "hello";
    }

    @GET
    @Path("/{name}")
    public String hello(@PathParam("name") String name) {
        return client.sayHello(HelloRequest.newBuilder().setName(name).build()).getMessage();  // <3>
    }
}
----
<1> Inject the service and configure its name. The name is used in the application configuration. If not specified then the field name is used instead: `hello` in this particular case.
<2> Use the generated service interface based on Mutiny API.
<3> Invoke the service.

We need to configure the application to indicate where the `hello` service is found.
In the `src/main/resources/application.properties` file, add the following property:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.grpc.clients.hello.host=localhost
----

- `hello` is the name used in the `@GrpcClient` annotation.
- `host` configures the service host (here it's localhost).

Then, open http://localhost:8080/hello/quarkus in a browser, and you should get `Hello quarkus`!

== Packaging the application

Like any other Quarkus applications, you can package it with: `mvn package`.
You can also package the application into a native executable with: `mvn package -Pnative`.

== Generating Java files from proto with protobuf-maven-plugin

Alternatively to using Quarkus code generation to generate stubs for `proto` files, you can also use
`protobuf-maven-plugin`.

To do it, first define the 2 following properties in the `<properties>` section:

[source,xml,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
<grpc.version>{grpc-version}</grpc.version>
<protoc.version>{protoc-version}</protoc.version>
----

They configure the gRPC version and the `protoc` version.

Then, add to the `build` section the `os-maven-plugin` extension and the `protobuf-maven-plugin` configuration.

[source,xml,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
<build>
    <extensions>
        <extension>
            <groupId>kr.motd.maven</groupId>
            <artifactId>os-maven-plugin</artifactId>
            <version>${os-maven-plugin-version}</version>
        </extension>
    </extensions>

    <plugins>
        <plugin>
            <groupId>org.xolstice.maven.plugins</groupId>
            <artifactId>protobuf-maven-plugin</artifactId>      // <1>
            <version>${protobuf-maven-plugin-version}</version>
            <configuration>
                <protocArtifact>com.google.protobuf:protoc:${protoc.version}:exe:${os.detected.classifier}</protocArtifact> // <2>
                <pluginId>grpc-java</pluginId>
                <pluginArtifact>io.grpc:protoc-gen-grpc-java:${grpc.version}:exe:${os.detected.classifier}</pluginArtifact>
                <protocPlugins>
                    <protocPlugin>
                        <id>quarkus-grpc-protoc-plugin</id>
                        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
                        <artifactId>quarkus-grpc-protoc-plugin</artifactId>
                        <version>{quarkus-version}</version>
                        <mainClass>io.quarkus.grpc.protoc.plugin.MutinyGrpcGenerator</mainClass>
                    </protocPlugin>
                </protocPlugins>
            </configuration>
            <executions>
                <execution>
                    <id>compile</id>
                    <goals>
                        <goal>compile</goal>
                        <goal>compile-custom</goal>
                    </goals>
                </execution>
                <execution>
                    <id>test-compile</id>
                    <goals>
                        <goal>test-compile</goal>
                        <goal>test-compile-custom</goal>
                    </goals>
                </execution>
            </executions>
        </plugin>

        <!-- ... -->
    </plugins>
</build>
----

1. The `protobuf-maven-plugin` that generates stub classes from your gRPC service definition (`proto` files).
2. The class generation uses a tool named `protoc`, which is OS-specific.
That's why we use the `os-maven-plugin` to target the executable compatible with the operating system.

NOTE: This configuration instructs the `protobuf-maven-plugin` to generate the default gRPC classes and classes using Mutiny to fit with the Quarkus development experience.

IMPORTANT: When using `protobuf-maven-plugin`, instead of the `quarkus-maven-plugin`, every time you update the `proto` files, you need to re-generate the classes (using `mvn compile`).

Commit message:

Bump gRPC version, overriding protoc-os-classifier, optional fields in proto
fixes #16451

docs/src/main/asciidoc/grpc-getting-started.adoc, after:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Getting Started with gRPC

include::./attributes.adoc[]

This page explains how to start using gRPC in your Quarkus application.
While this page describes how to configure it with Maven, it is also possible to use Gradle.

Let's imagine you have a regular Quarkus project, generated from the https://code.quarkus.io[Quarkus project generator].
The default configuration is enough, but you can also select some extensions if you want.

== Solution

We recommend that you follow the instructions in the next sections and create the application step by step.
However, you can go right to the completed example.

Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}`, or download an {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive].

The solution is located in the `grpc-plain-text-quickstart` {quickstarts-tree-url}/grpc-plain-text-quickstart[directory].

== Configuring your project

Edit the `pom.xml` file to add the Quarkus gRPC extension dependency (just under `<dependencies>`):

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
  <artifactId>quarkus-grpc</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

Make sure you have `generate-code` goal of `quarkus-maven-plugin` enabled in your `pom.xml`.
If you wish to generate code from different `proto` files for tests, also add the `generate-code-tests` goal.
Please note that no additional task/goal is required for the Gradle plugin.

[source,xml]
----
<build>
    <plugins>
        <plugin>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-maven-plugin</artifactId>
            <version>${quarkus-plugin.version}</version>
            <extensions>true</extensions>
            <executions>
                <execution>
                    <goals>
                        <goal>build</goal>
                        <goal>generate-code</goal>
                        <goal>generate-code-tests</goal>
                    </goals>
                </execution>
            </executions>
        </plugin>
    </plugins>
</build>
----

With this configuration, you can put your service and message definitions in the `src/main/proto` directory.
`quarkus-maven-plugin` will generate Java files from your `proto` files.

`quarkus-maven-plugin` retrieves a version of `protoc` (the protobuf compiler) from Maven repositories. The retrieved version matches your operating system and CPU architecture.
If this retrieved version does not work in your context, you can either force to use a different OS classifier with
`-Dquarkus.grpc.protoc-os-classifier=your-os-classifier` (e.g. `osx-x86_64`).
You can also download the suitable binary and specify the location via
`-Dquarkus.grpc.protoc-path=/path/to/protoc`.


Alternatively to using the `generate-code` goal of the `quarkus-maven-plugin`, you can use `protobuf-maven-plugin` to generate these files, more in <<Generating Java files from proto with protobuf-maven-plugin>>

Let's start with a simple _Hello_ service.
Create the `src/main/proto/helloworld.proto` file with the following content:

[source,javascript]
----
syntax = "proto3";

option java_multiple_files = true;
option java_package = "io.quarkus.example";
option java_outer_classname = "HelloWorldProto";

package helloworld;

// The greeting service definition.
service Greeter {
    // Sends a greeting
    rpc SayHello (HelloRequest) returns (HelloReply) {}
}

// The request message containing the user's name.
message HelloRequest {
    string name = 1;
}

// The response message containing the greetings
message HelloReply {
    string message = 1;
}
----

This `proto` file defines a simple service interface with a single method (`SayHello`), and the exchanged messages (`HelloRequest` containing the name and `HelloReply` containing the greeting message).

Before coding, we need to generate the classes used to implement and consume gRPC services.
In a terminal, run:

[source,shell]
----
$ mvn compile
----

Once generated, you can look at the `target/generated-sources/grpc` directory:

[source,txt]
----
target/generated-sources/grpc
└── io
    └── quarkus
        └── example
            ├── Greeter.java
            ├── GreeterBean.java
            ├── GreeterClient.java
            ├── GreeterGrpc.java
            ├── HelloReply.java
            ├── HelloReplyOrBuilder.java
            ├── HelloRequest.java
            ├── HelloRequestOrBuilder.java
            ├── HelloWorldProto.java
            └── MutinyGreeterGrpc.java
----

These are the classes we are going to use.


=== `proto` files with imports

Protocol Buffers specification provides a way to import `proto` files.
The Quarkus code generation mechanism lets you control the scope of dependencies to scan for possible imports by setting the `quarkus.generate-code.grpc.scan-for-imports` property to one of the following:

- `all` - scan all the dependencies
- `none` - don't scan the dependencies, use only what is defined in the `src/main/proto` or `src/test/proto`
- `groupId1:artifactId1,groupId2:artifactId2` - scan only the dependencies with group id and artifact id in the list.

If not specified, the property is set to `com.google.protobuf:protobuf-java`.
To override it, set the `quarkus.generate-code.grpc.scan-for-imports` property in your pom.xml (or gradle.properties) to the desired value, e.g.

[source,xml]
----
<properties>
  <quarkus.generate-code.grpc.scan-for-imports>all</quarkus.generate-code.grpc.scan-for-imports>
</properties>
----

== Implementing a gRPC service

Now that we have the generated classes let's implement our _hello_ service.

With Quarkus, implementing a service requires to implement the generated service interface based on Mutiny, a Reactive Programming API integrated in Quarkus, and expose it as a CDI bean. 
Learn more about Mutiny on the xref:mutiny-primer.adoc[Mutiny guide].
The service class must be annotated with the `@io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService` annotation.

=== Implementing a service

Create the `src/main/java/org/acme/HelloService.java` file with the following content:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme;

import io.grpc.stub.StreamObserver;
import io.quarkus.example.Greeter;
import io.quarkus.example.HelloReply;
import io.quarkus.example.HelloRequest;
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService;

@GrpcService <1>
public class HelloService implements Greeter {  <2>

    @Override
    public Uni<HelloReply> sayHello(HelloRequest request) { <3>
        return Uni.createFrom().item(() ->
                HelloReply.newBuilder().setMessage("Hello " + request.getName()).build()
        );
    }
}
----
<1> Expose your implementation as a bean.
<2> Implement the generated service interface.
<3> Implement the methods defined in the service definition (here we have a single method).

You can also use the default gRPC API instead of Mutiny:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme;

import io.grpc.stub.StreamObserver;
import io.quarkus.example.GreeterGrpc;
import io.quarkus.example.HelloReply;
import io.quarkus.example.HelloRequest;
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcService;

@GrpcService <1>
public class HelloService extends GreeterGrpc.GreeterImplBase { <2>

    @Override
    public void sayHello(HelloRequest request, StreamObserver<HelloReply> responseObserver) { <3>
        String name = request.getName();
        String message = "Hello " + name;
        responseObserver.onNext(HelloReply.newBuilder().setMessage(message).build()); <4>
        responseObserver.onCompleted(); <5>
    }
}
----
<1> Expose your implementation as a bean.
<2> Extends the `ImplBase` class. This is a generated class.
<3> Implement the methods defined in the service definition (here we have a single method).
<4> Build and send the response.
<5> Close the response.

NOTE: If your service implementation logic is blocking (use blocking I/O for example), annotate your method with
`@Blocking`.
The `io.smallrye.common.annotation.Blocking` annotation instructs the framework to invoke the
annotated method on a worker thread instead of the I/O thread (event-loop).

=== The gRPC server

The services are _served_ by a _server_.
Available services (_CDI beans_) are automatically registered and exposed.

By default, the server is exposed on `localhost:9000`, and uses _plain-text_ (so no TLS) when
running normally, and `localhost:9001` for tests.

Run the application using: `mvn quarkus:dev`.

== Consuming a gRPC service

In this section, we are going to consume the service we expose.
To simplify, we are going to consume the service from the same application, which in the real world, does not make sense.

Open the existing `org.acme.ExampleResource` class, and edit the content to become:

[source, java]
----
package org.acme;

import io.quarkus.example.Greeter;
import io.quarkus.example.HelloRequest;
import io.quarkus.grpc.GrpcClient;

import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.PathParam;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/hello")
public class ExampleResource {

    @GrpcClient                               // <1>
    Greeter hello;                            // <2>

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String hello() {
        return "hello";
    }

    @GET
    @Path("/{name}")
    public String hello(@PathParam("name") String name) {
        return client.sayHello(HelloRequest.newBuilder().setName(name).build()).getMessage();  // <3>
    }
}
----
<1> Inject the service and configure its name. The name is used in the application configuration. If not specified then the field name is used instead: `hello` in this particular case.
<2> Use the generated service interface based on Mutiny API.
<3> Invoke the service.

We need to configure the application to indicate where the `hello` service is found.
In the `src/main/resources/application.properties` file, add the following property:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.grpc.clients.hello.host=localhost
----

- `hello` is the name used in the `@GrpcClient` annotation.
- `host` configures the service host (here it's localhost).

Then, open http://localhost:8080/hello/quarkus in a browser, and you should get `Hello quarkus`!

== Packaging the application

Like any other Quarkus applications, you can package it with: `mvn package`.
You can also package the application into a native executable with: `mvn package -Pnative`.

== Generating Java files from proto with protobuf-maven-plugin

Alternatively to using Quarkus code generation to generate stubs for `proto` files, you can also use
`protobuf-maven-plugin`.

To do it, first define the 2 following properties in the `<properties>` section:

[source,xml,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
<grpc.version>{grpc-version}</grpc.version>
<protoc.version>{protoc-version}</protoc.version>
----

They configure the gRPC version and the `protoc` version.

Then, add to the `build` section the `os-maven-plugin` extension and the `protobuf-maven-plugin` configuration.

[source,xml,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
<build>
    <extensions>
        <extension>
            <groupId>kr.motd.maven</groupId>
            <artifactId>os-maven-plugin</artifactId>
            <version>${os-maven-plugin-version}</version>
        </extension>
    </extensions>

    <plugins>
        <plugin>
            <groupId>org.xolstice.maven.plugins</groupId>
            <artifactId>protobuf-maven-plugin</artifactId>      // <1>
            <version>${protobuf-maven-plugin-version}</version>
            <configuration>
                <protocArtifact>com.google.protobuf:protoc:${protoc.version}:exe:${os.detected.classifier}</protocArtifact> // <2>
                <pluginId>grpc-java</pluginId>
                <pluginArtifact>io.grpc:protoc-gen-grpc-java:${grpc.version}:exe:${os.detected.classifier}</pluginArtifact>
                <protocPlugins>
                    <protocPlugin>
                        <id>quarkus-grpc-protoc-plugin</id>
                        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
                        <artifactId>quarkus-grpc-protoc-plugin</artifactId>
                        <version>{quarkus-version}</version>
                        <mainClass>io.quarkus.grpc.protoc.plugin.MutinyGrpcGenerator</mainClass>
                    </protocPlugin>
                </protocPlugins>
            </configuration>
            <executions>
                <execution>
                    <id>compile</id>
                    <goals>
                        <goal>compile</goal>
                        <goal>compile-custom</goal>
                    </goals>
                </execution>
                <execution>
                    <id>test-compile</id>
                    <goals>
                        <goal>test-compile</goal>
                        <goal>test-compile-custom</goal>
                    </goals>
                </execution>
            </executions>
        </plugin>

        <!-- ... -->
    </plugins>
</build>
----

1. The `protobuf-maven-plugin` that generates stub classes from your gRPC service definition (`proto` files).
2. The class generation uses a tool named `protoc`, which is OS-specific.
That's why we use the `os-maven-plugin` to target the executable compatible with the operating system.

NOTE: This configuration instructs the `protobuf-maven-plugin` to generate the default gRPC classes and classes using Mutiny to fit with the Quarkus development experience.

IMPORTANT: When using `protobuf-maven-plugin`, instead of the `quarkus-maven-plugin`, every time you update the `proto` files, you need to re-generate the classes (using `mvn compile`).
