docs/src/main/asciidoc/http-reference.adoc, before:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= HTTP Reference

include::./attributes.adoc[]
:numbered:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4
:toc:

:numbered:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4


This document explains various HTTP features that you can use in Quarkus.

HTTP is provided using Eclipse Vert.x as the base HTTP layer. Servlet's are supported using a modified version of Undertow that
runs on top of Vert.x, and RESTEasy is used to provide JAX-RS support. If Undertow is present RESTEasy will run as a
Servlet filter, otherwise it will run directly on top of Vert.x with no Servlet involvement.

== Serving Static Resources

To serve static resources you must place them in the `META-INF/resources` directory of your application. This location
was chosen as it is the standard location for resources in `jar` files as defined by the Servlet spec. Even though
Quarkus can be used without Servlet following this convention allows existing code that places its resources in this
location to function correctly.

=== WebJar Locator Support

If you are using webjars, like the following JQuery one
[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.webjars</groupId>
    <artifactId>jquery</artifactId>
    <version>3.1.1</version>
</dependency>
----
and rather write `/webjars/jquery/jquery.min.js` instead of `/webjars/jquery/3.1.1/jquery.min.js`
in your HTML files, you can add the `quarkus-webjars-locator` extension to your project.
To use it, add the following to your project's dependencies:

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-webjars-locator</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

== Configuring the Context path

By default Quarkus will serve content from under the root context. If you want to change this you can use the
`quarkus.http.root-path` config key to set the context path.

If you are using Servlet you can control the Servlet context path via `quarkus.servlet.context-path`. This item is relative
to the http root above, and will only affect Servlet and things that run on top of Servlet. Most applications will
want to use the HTTP root as this affects everything that Quarkus serves.

If both are specified then all non-Servlet web endpoints will be relative to `quarkus.http.root-path`, while Servlet's
will be served relative to `{quarkus.http.root-path}/{quarkus.servlet.context-path}`.

If REST Assured is used for testing and `quarkus.http.root-path` is set then Quarkus will automatically configure the
base URL for use in Quarkus tests, so test URL's should not include the root path.

[[ssl]]
== Supporting secure connections with SSL

In order to have Quarkus support secure connections, you must either provide a certificate and associated key file, or supply a keystore.

In both cases, a password must be provided. See the designated paragraph for a detailed description of how to provide it.

[TIP]
====
To enable SSL support with native executables, please refer to our link:native-and-ssl[Using SSL With Native Executables guide].
====

=== Providing a certificate and key file

If the certificate has not been loaded into a keystore, it can be provided directly using the properties listed below.
Quarkus will first try to load the given files as resources, and uses the filesystem as a fallback.
The certificate / key pair will be loaded into a newly created keystore on startup.

Your `application.properties` would then look like this:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.file=/path/to/certificate
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.key-file=/path/to/key
----

=== Providing a keystore

An alternate solution is to directly provide a keystore which already contains a default entry with a certificate
 You will need to at least provide the file and a password.

As with the certificate/key file combination, Quarkus will first try to resolve the given path as a resource, before attempting to read it from the filesystem.

Add the following property to your `application.properties`:

[source,bash]
----
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.key-store-file=/path/to/keystore
----

As an optional hint, the type of keystore can be provided as one of the options listed.
If the type is not provided, Quarkus will try to deduce it from the file extensions, defaulting to type JKS.

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.key-store-file-type=[one of JKS, JCEKS, P12, PKCS12, PFX]
----

=== Setting the password

In both aforementioned scenarios, a password needs to be provided to create/load the keystore with.
The password can be set in your `application.properties` (in plain-text) using the following property:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.key-store-password=your-password
----

However, instead of providing the password as plain-text in the configuration file (which is considered bad practice), it can instead be supplied (using link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-config[MicroProfile Config])
as the environment variable `QUARKUS_HTTP_SSL_CERTIFICATE_KEY_STORE_PASSWORD`.
This will also work in tandem with link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/#using-secrets-as-environment-variables[Kubernetes secrets].

_Note: in order to remain compatible with earlier versions of Quarkus (before 0.16) the default password is set to "password". It is therefore not a mandatory parameter!_

=== Disable the HTTP port

It is possible to disable the HTTP port and only support secure requests. This is done via the
`quarkus.http.insecure-requests` property in `application.properties`. There are three possible
values:

`enabled`:: The default, HTTP works as normal
`redirect`:: HTTP requests will be redirected to the HTTPS port
`disabled`:: The HTTP port will not be opened.

NOTE: if you use `redirect` or `disabled` and have not added a SSL certificate or keystore, your server will not start!

== HTTP/2 Support

HTTP/2 is enabled by default, and will be used by browsers if SSL is in use on JDK11 or higher. JDK8 does not support
ALPN so cannot be used to run HTTP/2 over SSL. Even if SSL is not in use HTTP/2 via cleartext upgrade is supported,
and may be used by non-browser clients.

If you want to disable HTTP/2 you can set:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.http.http2=false
----

== Listening on a Random Port

If you don't want to specify a port you can set `quarkus.http.port=0` or `quarkus.http.test-port=0`. A random open port
will be picked by the OS, and a log message printed in the console. When the port is bound the `quarkus.http.port` system
property will be set to the actual port that was selected, so you can use this to get the actual port number from inside
the application. If you are in a test you can inject the URL normally and this will be configured with the actual port,
and REST Assured will also be configured appropriately.

WARNING: As this sets a system property you can access `quarkus.http.port` via MicroProfile Config, however if you use
injection the injected value may not always be correct. This port allocation is one of the last things to happen in
Quarkus startup, so if your object that is being injected is created eagerly before the port has opened the injected
value will not be correct.

== CORS filter

link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-origin_resource_sharing[Cross-origin resource sharing] (CORS) is a mechanism that
allows restricted resources on a web page to be requested from another domain outside the domain from which the first resource
was served.

Quarkus comes with a CORS filter which implements the `javax.servlet.Filter` interface and intercepts all incoming HTTP
requests. It can be enabled in the Quarkus configuration file, `src/main/resources/application.properties`:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.http.cors=true
----

If the filter is enabled and an HTTP request is identified as cross-origin, the CORS policy and headers defined using the
following properties will be applied before passing the request on to its actual target (servlet, JAX-RS resource, etc.):


include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vertx-http-config-group-cors-cors-config.adoc[leveloffset=+1, opts=optional]

Here's what a full CORS filter configuration could look like, including a regular expression defining an allowed origin:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.http.cors=true
quarkus.http.cors.origins=http://foo.com,http://www.bar.io,/https://([a-z0-9\\-_]+)\\.app\\.mydomain\\.com/
quarkus.http.cors.methods=GET,PUT,POST
quarkus.http.cors.headers=X-Custom
quarkus.http.cors.exposed-headers=Content-Disposition
quarkus.http.cors.access-control-max-age=24H
quarkus.http.cors.access-control-allow-credentials=true
----

== HTTP Limits Configuration

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vertx-http-config-group-server-limits-config.adoc[leveloffset=+1, opts=optional]

== Configuring HTTP Access Logs

You can add HTTP request logging by configuring it in `application.properties`. There are two options for logging,
either logging to the standard JBoss logging output, or logging to a dedicated file.

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vertx-http-config-group-access-log-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

[frame="topbot",options="header"]
|===
|Attribute                                                                    |Short Form|Long Form
|Remote IP address                                                            | `%a`     | `%{REMOTE_IP}`
|Local IP address                                                             | `%A`     | `%{LOCAL_IP}`
|Bytes sent, excluding HTTP headers, or '-' if no bytes were sent             | `%b`     |
|Bytes sent, excluding HTTP headers                                           | `%B`     | `%{BYTES_SENT}`
|Remote host name                                                             | `%h`     | `%{REMOTE_HOST}`
|Request protocol                                                             | `%H`     | `%{PROTOCOL}`
|Request method                                                               | `%m`     | `%{METHOD}`
|Local port                                                                   | `%p`     | `%{LOCAL_PORT}`
|Query string (prepended with a '?' if it exists, otherwise an empty string)  | `%q`     | `%{QUERY_STRING}`
|First line of the request                                                    | `%r`     | `%{REQUEST_LINE}`
|HTTP status code of the response                                             | `%s`     | `%{RESPONSE_CODE}`
|Date and time, in Common Log Format format                                   | `%t`     | `%{DATE_TIME}`
|Remote user that was authenticated                                           | `%u`     | `%{REMOTE_USER}`
|Requested URL path                                                           | `%U`     | `%{REQUEST_URL}`
|Request relative path                                                        | `%R`     | `%{REQUEST_PATH}`
|Local server name                                                            | `%v`     | `%{LOCAL_SERVER_NAME}`
|Time taken to process the request, in millis                                 | `%D`     | `%{RESPONSE_TIME}`
|Time taken to process the request, in seconds                                | `%T`     |
|Time taken to process the request, in micros                                 |          | `%{RESPONSE_TIME_MICROS}`
|Time taken to process the request, in nanos                                  |          | `%{RESPONSE_TIME_NANOS}`
|Current request thread name                                                  | `%I`     | `%{THREAD_NAME}`
|SSL cypher                                                                   |          | `%{SSL_CIPHER}`
|SSL client certificate                                                       |          | `%{SSL_CLIENT_CERT}`
|SSL session id                                                               |          | `%{SSL_SESSION_ID}`
|All request headers                                                          |          | `%{ALL_REQUEST_HEADERS}`
|Cookie value                                                                 |          | `%{c,cookie_name}`
|Query parameter                                                              |          | `%{q,query_param_name}`
|Request header                                                               |          | `%{i,request_header_name}`
|Response header                                                              |          | `%{o,response_header_name}`
|===


[[reverse-proxy]]
== Running behind a reverse proxy

Quarkus could be accessed through proxies that additionally generate headers (e.g. `X-Forwarded-Host`) to keep
information from the client-facing side of the proxy servers that is altered or lost when they are involved.
In those scenarios, Quarkus can be configured to automatically update information like protocol, host, port and URI
reflecting the values in these headers.

IMPORTANT: Activating this feature leaves the server exposed to several security issues (i.e. information spoofing).
Consider activate it only when running behind a reverse proxy.

To setup this feature, please include the following lines in `src/main/resources/application.properties`:
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.proxy-address-forwarding=true
----

To consider only de-facto standard header (`Forwarded` header), please include the following lines in `src/main/resources/application.properties`:
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.proxy.allow-forwarded=true
----

To consider only non-standard headers, please include the following lines instead in `src/main/resources/application.properties`:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.proxy.proxy-address-forwarding=true
quarkus.http.proxy.enable-forwarded-host=true
quarkus.http.proxy.enable-forwarded-prefix=true
----

Both configurations related to standard and non-standard headers can be combined, although the standard headers configuration will have precedence.

Supported forwarding address headers are:

* `Forwarded`
* `X-Forwarded-Proto`
* `X-Forwarded-Host`
* `X-Forwarded-Port`
* `X-Forwarded-Ssl`
* `X-Forwarded-Prefix`

[[same-site-cookie]]
== SameSite cookies

One can easily add a https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Set-Cookie/SameSite[SameSite] cookie property to any of the cookies set by a Quarkus endpoint by listing a cookie name and a `SameSite` attribute, for example:

[source]
----
quarkus.http.same-site-cookie.jwt.value=Lax
quarkus.http.same-site-cookie.session.value=Strict
----

Given this configuration, the `jwt` cookie will have a `SameSite=Lax` attribute and the `session` cookie will have a `SameSite=Strict` attribute.

== Servlet Config

To use Servlet you need to explicitly include `quarkus-undertow`:

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
  <artifactId>quarkus-undertow</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

=== undertow-handlers.conf

You can make use of the Undertow predicate language using an `undertow-handlers.conf` file. This file should be placed
in the `META-INF` directory of your application jar. This file contains handlers defined using the
link:http://undertow.io/undertow-docs/undertow-docs-2.0.0/index.html#predicates-attributes-and-handlers[Undertow predicate language].

=== web.xml

If you are using a `web.xml` file as your configuration file, you can place it in the `src/main/resources/META-INF` directory.

Commit message:

Introduce quarkus.http.header
This allows to explicitly set fixed headers on HTTP responses

Support path and method for the header

Signed-off-by: George Gastaldi <gegastaldi@gmail.com>

docs/src/main/asciidoc/http-reference.adoc, after:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= HTTP Reference

include::./attributes.adoc[]
:numbered:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4
:toc:

:numbered:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4


This document explains various HTTP features that you can use in Quarkus.

HTTP is provided using Eclipse Vert.x as the base HTTP layer. Servlet's are supported using a modified version of Undertow that
runs on top of Vert.x, and RESTEasy is used to provide JAX-RS support. If Undertow is present RESTEasy will run as a
Servlet filter, otherwise it will run directly on top of Vert.x with no Servlet involvement.

== Serving Static Resources

To serve static resources you must place them in the `META-INF/resources` directory of your application. This location
was chosen as it is the standard location for resources in `jar` files as defined by the Servlet spec. Even though
Quarkus can be used without Servlet following this convention allows existing code that places its resources in this
location to function correctly.

=== WebJar Locator Support

If you are using webjars, like the following JQuery one
[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.webjars</groupId>
    <artifactId>jquery</artifactId>
    <version>3.1.1</version>
</dependency>
----
and rather write `/webjars/jquery/jquery.min.js` instead of `/webjars/jquery/3.1.1/jquery.min.js`
in your HTML files, you can add the `quarkus-webjars-locator` extension to your project.
To use it, add the following to your project's dependencies:

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-webjars-locator</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

== Configuring the Context path

By default Quarkus will serve content from under the root context. If you want to change this you can use the
`quarkus.http.root-path` config key to set the context path.

If you are using Servlet you can control the Servlet context path via `quarkus.servlet.context-path`. This item is relative
to the http root above, and will only affect Servlet and things that run on top of Servlet. Most applications will
want to use the HTTP root as this affects everything that Quarkus serves.

If both are specified then all non-Servlet web endpoints will be relative to `quarkus.http.root-path`, while Servlet's
will be served relative to `{quarkus.http.root-path}/{quarkus.servlet.context-path}`.

If REST Assured is used for testing and `quarkus.http.root-path` is set then Quarkus will automatically configure the
base URL for use in Quarkus tests, so test URL's should not include the root path.

[[ssl]]
== Supporting secure connections with SSL

In order to have Quarkus support secure connections, you must either provide a certificate and associated key file, or supply a keystore.

In both cases, a password must be provided. See the designated paragraph for a detailed description of how to provide it.

[TIP]
====
To enable SSL support with native executables, please refer to our link:native-and-ssl[Using SSL With Native Executables guide].
====

=== Providing a certificate and key file

If the certificate has not been loaded into a keystore, it can be provided directly using the properties listed below.
Quarkus will first try to load the given files as resources, and uses the filesystem as a fallback.
The certificate / key pair will be loaded into a newly created keystore on startup.

Your `application.properties` would then look like this:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.file=/path/to/certificate
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.key-file=/path/to/key
----

=== Providing a keystore

An alternate solution is to directly provide a keystore which already contains a default entry with a certificate
 You will need to at least provide the file and a password.

As with the certificate/key file combination, Quarkus will first try to resolve the given path as a resource, before attempting to read it from the filesystem.

Add the following property to your `application.properties`:

[source,bash]
----
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.key-store-file=/path/to/keystore
----

As an optional hint, the type of keystore can be provided as one of the options listed.
If the type is not provided, Quarkus will try to deduce it from the file extensions, defaulting to type JKS.

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.key-store-file-type=[one of JKS, JCEKS, P12, PKCS12, PFX]
----

=== Setting the password

In both aforementioned scenarios, a password needs to be provided to create/load the keystore with.
The password can be set in your `application.properties` (in plain-text) using the following property:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.key-store-password=your-password
----

However, instead of providing the password as plain-text in the configuration file (which is considered bad practice), it can instead be supplied (using link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-config[MicroProfile Config])
as the environment variable `QUARKUS_HTTP_SSL_CERTIFICATE_KEY_STORE_PASSWORD`.
This will also work in tandem with link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/#using-secrets-as-environment-variables[Kubernetes secrets].

_Note: in order to remain compatible with earlier versions of Quarkus (before 0.16) the default password is set to "password". It is therefore not a mandatory parameter!_

=== Disable the HTTP port

It is possible to disable the HTTP port and only support secure requests. This is done via the
`quarkus.http.insecure-requests` property in `application.properties`. There are three possible
values:

`enabled`:: The default, HTTP works as normal
`redirect`:: HTTP requests will be redirected to the HTTPS port
`disabled`:: The HTTP port will not be opened.

NOTE: if you use `redirect` or `disabled` and have not added a SSL certificate or keystore, your server will not start!

== Additional HTTP Headers

To enable HTTP headers to be sent on every response, add the following properties:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.http.header."X-Content-Type-Options".value=nosniff
----

This will include the `X-Content-Type-Options: nosniff` HTTP Header on responses for requests performed on any resource in the application.

You can also specify a `path` pattern and the HTTP `methods` the header needs to be applied:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.http.header.Pragma.value=no-cache
quarkus.http.header.Pragma.path=/headers/pragma
quarkus.http.header.Pragma.methods=GET,HEAD
----

This will apply the `Pragma` header only when the `/headers/pragma` resource is called with a `GET` or a `HEAD` method

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vertx-http-config-group-header-config.adoc[leveloffset=+1, opts=optional]

== HTTP/2 Support

HTTP/2 is enabled by default, and will be used by browsers if SSL is in use on JDK11 or higher. JDK8 does not support
ALPN so cannot be used to run HTTP/2 over SSL. Even if SSL is not in use HTTP/2 via cleartext upgrade is supported,
and may be used by non-browser clients.

If you want to disable HTTP/2 you can set:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.http.http2=false
----

== Listening on a Random Port

If you don't want to specify a port you can set `quarkus.http.port=0` or `quarkus.http.test-port=0`. A random open port
will be picked by the OS, and a log message printed in the console. When the port is bound the `quarkus.http.port` system
property will be set to the actual port that was selected, so you can use this to get the actual port number from inside
the application. If you are in a test you can inject the URL normally and this will be configured with the actual port,
and REST Assured will also be configured appropriately.

WARNING: As this sets a system property you can access `quarkus.http.port` via MicroProfile Config, however if you use
injection the injected value may not always be correct. This port allocation is one of the last things to happen in
Quarkus startup, so if your object that is being injected is created eagerly before the port has opened the injected
value will not be correct.

== CORS filter

link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-origin_resource_sharing[Cross-origin resource sharing] (CORS) is a mechanism that
allows restricted resources on a web page to be requested from another domain outside the domain from which the first resource
was served.

Quarkus comes with a CORS filter which implements the `javax.servlet.Filter` interface and intercepts all incoming HTTP
requests. It can be enabled in the Quarkus configuration file, `src/main/resources/application.properties`:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.http.cors=true
----

If the filter is enabled and an HTTP request is identified as cross-origin, the CORS policy and headers defined using the
following properties will be applied before passing the request on to its actual target (servlet, JAX-RS resource, etc.):


include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vertx-http-config-group-cors-cors-config.adoc[leveloffset=+1, opts=optional]

Here's what a full CORS filter configuration could look like, including a regular expression defining an allowed origin:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.http.cors=true
quarkus.http.cors.origins=http://foo.com,http://www.bar.io,/https://([a-z0-9\\-_]+)\\.app\\.mydomain\\.com/
quarkus.http.cors.methods=GET,PUT,POST
quarkus.http.cors.headers=X-Custom
quarkus.http.cors.exposed-headers=Content-Disposition
quarkus.http.cors.access-control-max-age=24H
quarkus.http.cors.access-control-allow-credentials=true
----

== HTTP Limits Configuration

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vertx-http-config-group-server-limits-config.adoc[leveloffset=+1, opts=optional]

== Configuring HTTP Access Logs

You can add HTTP request logging by configuring it in `application.properties`. There are two options for logging,
either logging to the standard JBoss logging output, or logging to a dedicated file.

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vertx-http-config-group-access-log-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

[frame="topbot",options="header"]
|===
|Attribute                                                                    |Short Form|Long Form
|Remote IP address                                                            | `%a`     | `%{REMOTE_IP}`
|Local IP address                                                             | `%A`     | `%{LOCAL_IP}`
|Bytes sent, excluding HTTP headers, or '-' if no bytes were sent             | `%b`     |
|Bytes sent, excluding HTTP headers                                           | `%B`     | `%{BYTES_SENT}`
|Remote host name                                                             | `%h`     | `%{REMOTE_HOST}`
|Request protocol                                                             | `%H`     | `%{PROTOCOL}`
|Request method                                                               | `%m`     | `%{METHOD}`
|Local port                                                                   | `%p`     | `%{LOCAL_PORT}`
|Query string (prepended with a '?' if it exists, otherwise an empty string)  | `%q`     | `%{QUERY_STRING}`
|First line of the request                                                    | `%r`     | `%{REQUEST_LINE}`
|HTTP status code of the response                                             | `%s`     | `%{RESPONSE_CODE}`
|Date and time, in Common Log Format format                                   | `%t`     | `%{DATE_TIME}`
|Remote user that was authenticated                                           | `%u`     | `%{REMOTE_USER}`
|Requested URL path                                                           | `%U`     | `%{REQUEST_URL}`
|Request relative path                                                        | `%R`     | `%{REQUEST_PATH}`
|Local server name                                                            | `%v`     | `%{LOCAL_SERVER_NAME}`
|Time taken to process the request, in millis                                 | `%D`     | `%{RESPONSE_TIME}`
|Time taken to process the request, in seconds                                | `%T`     |
|Time taken to process the request, in micros                                 |          | `%{RESPONSE_TIME_MICROS}`
|Time taken to process the request, in nanos                                  |          | `%{RESPONSE_TIME_NANOS}`
|Current request thread name                                                  | `%I`     | `%{THREAD_NAME}`
|SSL cypher                                                                   |          | `%{SSL_CIPHER}`
|SSL client certificate                                                       |          | `%{SSL_CLIENT_CERT}`
|SSL session id                                                               |          | `%{SSL_SESSION_ID}`
|All request headers                                                          |          | `%{ALL_REQUEST_HEADERS}`
|Cookie value                                                                 |          | `%{c,cookie_name}`
|Query parameter                                                              |          | `%{q,query_param_name}`
|Request header                                                               |          | `%{i,request_header_name}`
|Response header                                                              |          | `%{o,response_header_name}`
|===


[[reverse-proxy]]
== Running behind a reverse proxy

Quarkus could be accessed through proxies that additionally generate headers (e.g. `X-Forwarded-Host`) to keep
information from the client-facing side of the proxy servers that is altered or lost when they are involved.
In those scenarios, Quarkus can be configured to automatically update information like protocol, host, port and URI
reflecting the values in these headers.

IMPORTANT: Activating this feature leaves the server exposed to several security issues (i.e. information spoofing).
Consider activate it only when running behind a reverse proxy.

To setup this feature, please include the following lines in `src/main/resources/application.properties`:
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.proxy-address-forwarding=true
----

To consider only de-facto standard header (`Forwarded` header), please include the following lines in `src/main/resources/application.properties`:
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.proxy.allow-forwarded=true
----

To consider only non-standard headers, please include the following lines instead in `src/main/resources/application.properties`:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.proxy.proxy-address-forwarding=true
quarkus.http.proxy.enable-forwarded-host=true
quarkus.http.proxy.enable-forwarded-prefix=true
----

Both configurations related to standard and non-standard headers can be combined, although the standard headers configuration will have precedence.

Supported forwarding address headers are:

* `Forwarded`
* `X-Forwarded-Proto`
* `X-Forwarded-Host`
* `X-Forwarded-Port`
* `X-Forwarded-Ssl`
* `X-Forwarded-Prefix`

[[same-site-cookie]]
== SameSite cookies

One can easily add a https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Set-Cookie/SameSite[SameSite] cookie property to any of the cookies set by a Quarkus endpoint by listing a cookie name and a `SameSite` attribute, for example:

[source]
----
quarkus.http.same-site-cookie.jwt.value=Lax
quarkus.http.same-site-cookie.session.value=Strict
----

Given this configuration, the `jwt` cookie will have a `SameSite=Lax` attribute and the `session` cookie will have a `SameSite=Strict` attribute.

== Servlet Config

To use Servlet you need to explicitly include `quarkus-undertow`:

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
  <artifactId>quarkus-undertow</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

=== undertow-handlers.conf

You can make use of the Undertow predicate language using an `undertow-handlers.conf` file. This file should be placed
in the `META-INF` directory of your application jar. This file contains handlers defined using the
link:http://undertow.io/undertow-docs/undertow-docs-2.0.0/index.html#predicates-attributes-and-handlers[Undertow predicate language].

=== web.xml

If you are using a `web.xml` file as your configuration file, you can place it in the `src/main/resources/META-INF` directory.
