docs/src/main/asciidoc/infinispan-client.adoc, before:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Infinispan Client

include::./attributes.adoc[]

Infinispan is a distributed, in-memory key/value store that provides Quarkus applications with a highly configurable
and independently scalable data layer.
This extension gives you client functionality that connects applications running on Quarkus with remote Infinispan clusters.

To find out more about Infinispan, visit the https://infinispan.org/documentation[Infinispan documentation].

== Solution

We recommend that you complete each step in the following sections to create the application.
However, you can proceed directly to the completed solution as follows:

Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}` or download an {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive].
Locate the solution in the `infinispan-client-quickstart` {quickstarts-tree-url}/infinispan-client-quickstart[directory].

== Adding the Infinispan client extension

Run the following command in the base directory of your Quarkus project to add the `infinispan-client` extension:

[source]
----
./mvnw quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="infinispan-client"
----

This command adds the following dependency to your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-infinispan-client</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

== Configuring the Infinispan client

Open the `application.properties` file in the `src/main/resources` directory with any text editor.

Note that Infinispan documentation refers to a `hotrod-client.properties` file.
You can configure the Infinispan client with either properties file but `hotrod-client.properties` always takes
priority over `application.properties`.

Additionally, you cannot update configuration properties at runtime.
If you modify `application.properties` or `hotrod-client.properties`, you must rebuild the application before those changes take effect.

== Connecting to Infinispan clusters

Add the following properties to connect to Infinispan Server:

[source,properties]
----
# Infinispan Server address
quarkus.infinispan-client.server-list=localhost:11222

# Authentication
quarkus.infinispan-client.auth-username=admin
quarkus.infinispan-client.auth-password=password

# Infinispan client intelligence
# Use BASIC as a Docker for Mac workaround
quarkus.infinispan-client.client-intelligence=BASIC
----

.Running Infinispan Server

To use the Infinispan client extension, you need at least one running instance of Infinispan Server.

Check out our 5 minute https://infinispan.org/get-started/[Getting stated with Infinispan] tutorial to run Infinispan Server locally.

Infinispan Server also enables authentication and security authorization by default so you need to create a user with permissions.

* If you run the Infinispan Server image, pass the `USER="admin"` and `PASS="password"` parameters.
* If you run the bare metal distribution, use the Command Line Interface (CLI) as follows:
+
[source,bash]
----
$ ./bin/cli.sh user create admin -p password
----

=== Authentication mechanisms

You can use the following authentication mechanisms with the Infinispan client:

* DIGEST-MD5
* PLAIN (recommended only in combination with TLS encryption)
* EXTERNAL

Other authentication mechanisms, such as SCRAM and GSSAPI, are not yet verified with the Infinispan client.

You can find more information on configuring authentication in https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/hotrod_java/hotrod_java.html#hotrod_endpoint_auth-hotrod-client-configuration[Hot Rod Endpoint Authentication Mechanisms].

[NOTE]
====
You must configure authentication in the `hotrod-client.properties` file if you use Dependency Injection.
====

== Serialization (Key Value types support)

By default the client will support keys and values of the following types: byte[],
primitive wrappers (eg. Integer, Long, Double etc.), String, Date and Instant. User types require
some additional steps that are detailed here. Let's say we have the following user classes:

.Author.java
[source,java]
----
public class Author {
   private final String name;
   private final String surname;

   public Author(String name, String surname) {
      this.name = Objects.requireNonNull(name);
      this.surname = Objects.requireNonNull(surname);
   }
   // Getter/Setter/equals/hashCode/toString omitted
}
----

.Book.java
[source,java]
----
public class Book {
   private final String title;
   private final String description;
   private final int publicationYear;
   private final Set<Author> authors;
   private final BigDecimal price;

   public Book(String title, String description, int publicationYear, Set<Author> authors, BigDecimal price) {
      this.title = Objects.requireNonNull(title);
      this.description = Objects.requireNonNull(description);
      this.publicationYear = publicationYear;
      this.authors = Objects.requireNonNull(authors);
      this.price = price;
   }
   // Getter/Setter/equals/hashCode/toString omitted
}
----

Serialization of user types uses a library based on protobuf,
called https://github.com/infinispan/protostream[Protostream].

[TIP]
====
Infinispan caches can store keys and values in different encodings, but recommend using https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers[Protocol Buffers (Protobuf)].

For more information see our https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/encoding/encoding.html[Cache Encoding and Marshalling] guide.
====


=== Annotation based Serialization

This can be done automatically by adding protostream annotations to your user classes.
In addition, a single Initializer annotated interface is required which controls how
the supporting classes are generated.

Here is an example of how the preceding classes should be changed:

.Author.java
[source,java]
----
    @ProtoFactory
    public Author(String name, String surname) {
        this.name = Objects.requireNonNull(name);
        this.surname = Objects.requireNonNull(surname);
    }

    @ProtoField(number = 1)
    public String getName() {
        return name;
    }

    @ProtoField(number = 2)
    public String getSurname() {
        return surname;
    }
----

.Book.java
[source,java]
----
    @ProtoFactory
    public Book(String title, String description, int publicationYear, Set<Author> authors) {
        this.title = Objects.requireNonNull(title);
        this.description = Objects.requireNonNull(description);
        this.publicationYear = publicationYear;
        this.authors = Objects.requireNonNull(authors);
    }

    @ProtoField(number = 1)
    public String getTitle() {
        return title;
    }

    @ProtoField(number = 2)
    public String getDescription() {
        return description;
    }

    @ProtoField(number = 3, defaultValue = "-1")
    public int getPublicationYear() {
        return publicationYear;
    }

    @ProtoField(number = 4)
    public Set<Author> getAuthors() {
        return authors;
    }
----

If your classes have only mutable fields, then the `ProtoFactory` annotation
is not required, assuming your class has a no arg constructor.

Then all that is required is a very simple `GeneratedSchema` interface with an annotation
on it to specify configuration settings

.BooksSchema.java
[source,java]
----
import org.infinispan.protostream.GeneratedSchema;
import org.infinispan.protostream.annotations.AutoProtoSchemaBuilder;
import org.infinispan.protostream.types.java.math.BigDecimalAdapter;

@AutoProtoSchemaBuilder(includeClasses = { Book.class, Author.class, BigDecimalAdapter.class }, schemaPackageName = "book_sample")
interface BookStoreSchema extends GeneratedSchema {
}
----

[TIP]
Protostream provides default Protobuf mappers for commonly used types as `BigDecimal`, included in the `org.infinispan.protostream.types` package.

So in this case we will automatically generate the marshaller and schemas for the included classes and
place them in the schema package automatically. The package does not have to be provided, but if you use Infinispan query capabilities, you must know the generated package.

NOTE: In Quarkus the `schemaFileName` and `schemaFilePath` attributes should NOT be set on the `AutoProtoSchemaBuilder` annotation. Setting either attributes causes native runtime errors.

=== Custom serialization

The previous method is suggested for any case when the user can annotate their classes.
Unfortunately the user may not be able to annotate all classes they will put in the
cache. In this case you must define your schema and create your own Marshaller(s)
yourself.

Protobuf schema:: You can supply a protobuf schema through either one of two ways.
. Proto File
 +
You can put the `.proto` file in the `META-INF` directory of the project. These files will
automatically be picked up at initialization time.
+
.library.proto
----
package book_sample;

message Book {
  required string title = 1;
  required string description = 2;
  required int32 publicationYear = 3; // no native Date type available in Protobuf
  repeated Author authors = 4;
  requited double price = 5; // no native BigDecimal type available in Protobuf
}

message Author {
  required string name = 1;
  required string surname = 2;
}
----
. In Code
 +
Or you can define the proto schema directly in user code by defining a produced bean of type
`org.infinispan.protostream.FileDescriptorSource`.
+
[source,java]
----
   @Produces
   FileDescriptorSource bookProtoDefinition() {
      return FileDescriptorSource.fromString("library.proto", "package book_sample;\n" +
            "\n" +
            "message Book {\n" +
            "  required string title = 1;\n" +
            "  required string description = 2;\n" +
            "  required int32 publicationYear = 3; // no native Date type available in Protobuf\n" +
            "\n" +
            "  repeated Author authors = 4;\n" +
            "\n" +
            "  required double price = 5; // no native BigDecimal type available in Protobuf\n" +
            "}\n" +
            "\n" +
            "message Author {\n" +
            "  required string name = 1;\n" +
            "  required string surname = 2;\n" +
            "}");
   }
----
User Marshaller::
The last thing to do is to provide a `org.infinispan.protostream.MessageMarshaller` implementation
for each user class defined in the proto schema. This class is then provided via `@Produces` in a similar
fashion to the code based proto schema definition above.
+
Here is the Marshaller class for our Author & Book classes.
+
NOTE: The type name must match the `<protobuf package>.<protobuf message>` exactly!
+
.AuthorMarshaller.java
[source,java]
----
public class AuthorMarshaller implements MessageMarshaller<Author> {

   @Override
   public String getTypeName() {
      return "book_sample.Author";
   }

   @Override
   public Class<? extends Author> getJavaClass() {
      return Author.class;
   }

   @Override
   public void writeTo(ProtoStreamWriter writer, Author author) throws IOException {
      writer.writeString("name", author.getName());
      writer.writeString("surname", author.getSurname());
   }

   @Override
   public Author readFrom(ProtoStreamReader reader) throws IOException {
      String name = reader.readString("name");
      String surname = reader.readString("surname");
      return new Author(name, surname);
   }
}
----
+
.BookMarshaller.java
[source,java]
----
public class BookMarshaller implements MessageMarshaller<Book> {

   @Override
   public String getTypeName() {
      return "book_sample.Book";
   }

   @Override
   public Class<? extends Book> getJavaClass() {
      return Book.class;
   }

   @Override
   public void writeTo(ProtoStreamWriter writer, Book book) throws IOException {
      writer.writeString("title", book.getTitle());
      writer.writeString("description", book.getDescription());
      writer.writeInt("publicationYear", book.getPublicationYear());
      writer.writeCollection("authors", book.getAuthors(), Author.class);
      writer.writeDouble("price", book.getPrice().doubleValue());
   }

   @Override
   public Book readFrom(ProtoStreamReader reader) throws IOException {
      String title = reader.readString("title");
      String description = reader.readString("description");
      int publicationYear = reader.readInt("publicationYear");
      Set<Author> authors = reader.readCollection("authors", new HashSet<>(), Author.class);
      BigDecimal price = BigDecimal.valueOf(reader.readDouble("price"));
      return new Book(title, description, publicationYear, authors, price);
   }
}
----
+
And you pass the marshaller by defining the following:
+
[source,java]
----
   @Produces
   MessageMarshaller authorMarshaller() {
      return new AuthorMarshaller();
   }

   @Produces
   MessageMarshaller bookMarshaller() {
      return new BookMarshaller();
   }
----
NOTE: The above produced Marshaller method MUST return `MessageMarshaller` without types or else it will not be found.

== Dependency Injection

As you saw above we support the user injecting Marshaller configuration. You can do the inverse with
the Infinispan client extension providing injection for `RemoteCacheManager` and `RemoteCache` objects.
There is one global `RemoteCacheManager` that takes all of the configuration
parameters setup in the above sections.

It is very simple to inject these components. All you need to do is to add the Inject annotation to
the field, constructor or method. In the below code we utilize field and constructor injection.

.SomeClass.java
[source,java]
----
    @Inject SomeClass(RemoteCacheManager remoteCacheManager) {
       this.remoteCacheManager = remoteCacheManager;
    }

    @Inject @Remote("myCache")
    RemoteCache<String, Book> cache;

    RemoteCacheManager remoteCacheManager;
----

If you notice the `RemoteCache` declaration has an additional optional annotation named `Remote`.
This is a qualifier annotation allowing you to specify which named cache that will be injected. This
annotation is not required and if it is not supplied, the default cache will be injected.

NOTE: Other types may be supported for injection, please see other sections for more information

=== Registering Protobuf Schemas with Infinispan Server
You need to register the generated Protobuf schemas with Infinispan Server to perform queries or convert from
`Protobuf` to other media types such as `JSON`.

[TIP]
You can check the schemas that exist under the `Schemas` tab by logging into
Infinispan Console at `http://localhost:11222`

By default Protobuf schemas generated this way will be registered by this extension when the client first connects.
However, it might be required to handle the registration manually as a schema may evolve over time when used in
production, so you can disable this from occurring by configuring the
`quarkus.infinispan-client.use-schema-registration` to `false`.

To configure the schema manually
please use https://infinispan.org/docs/infinispan-operator/master/operator.html[Infinispan Operator]
for Kubernetes deployments, Infinispan Console,
https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/rest/rest.html#rest_v2_protobuf_schemas[REST API] or the
https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/encoding/encoding.html#registering-sci-remote-caches_marshalling[Hot Rod Java Client].


== Querying

The Infinispan client supports both indexed and non-indexed querying as long as the
`ProtoStreamMarshaller` is configured above. This allows the user to query based on the
properties of the proto schema.

Query builds upon the proto definitions you can configure when setting up the `ProtoStreamMarshaller`.
Either method of Serialization above will automatically register the schema with the server at
startup, meaning that you will automatically gain the ability to query objects stored in the
remote Infinispan Server.

You can read more about https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/developing/developing.html#creating_ickle_queries-querying[querying] in the Infinispan documentation.

You can use either the Query DSL or the Ickle Query language with the Quarkus Infinispan client
extension.

== Counters

Infinispan also has a notion of counters and the Quarkus Infinispan client supports them out of
the box.

The Quarkus Infinispan client extension allows for Dependency Injection
of the `CounterManager` directly. All you need to do is annotate your field, constructor or method
and you get it with no fuss. You can then use counters as you would normally.

[source,java]
----
@Inject
CounterManager counterManager;
----

You can read more about https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/developing/developing.html#clustered_counters[clustered counters] in the Infinispan documentation.

== Near Caching

Near caching is disabled by default, but you can enable it by setting the profile config property
`quarkus.infinispan-client.near-cache-max-entries` to a value greater than 0. You can also configure
a regular expression so that only a subset of caches have near caching applied through the
`quarkus.infinispan-client.near-cache-name-pattern` attribute.

== Encryption

Encryption at this point requires additional steps to get working.

The first step is to configure the `hotrod-client.properties` file to point to your truststore
and/or keystore. This is further detailed https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/hotrod_java/hotrod_java.html#hotrod_encryption[here].

The Infinispan Client extension enables SSL/TLS by default. You can read more about this
at link:native-and-ssl[Using SSL With Native Executables].

== Additional Features

The Infinispan Client has additional features that were not mentioned here. This means this
feature was not tested in a Quarkus environment and they may or may not work. Please let us
know if you need these added!

== Configuration Reference

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-infinispan-client.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

Commit message:

Upgrades to Infinispan 13.0.0.Final, adds infinispan test resource

docs/src/main/asciidoc/infinispan-client.adoc, after:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Infinispan Client

include::./attributes.adoc[]

Infinispan is a distributed, in-memory key/value store that provides Quarkus applications with a highly configurable
and independently scalable data layer.
This extension gives you client functionality that connects applications running on Quarkus with remote Infinispan clusters.

To find out more about Infinispan, visit the https://infinispan.org/documentation[Infinispan documentation].

== Solution

We recommend that you complete each step in the following sections to create the application.
However, you can proceed directly to the completed solution as follows:

Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}` or download an {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive].
Locate the solution in the `infinispan-client-quickstart` {quickstarts-tree-url}/infinispan-client-quickstart[directory].

== Adding the Infinispan client extension

Run the following command in the base directory of your Quarkus project to add the `infinispan-client` extension:

[source]
----
./mvnw quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="infinispan-client"
----

This command adds the following dependency to your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-infinispan-client</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

== Configuring the Infinispan client

Open the `application.properties` file in the `src/main/resources` directory with any text editor.

Note that Infinispan documentation refers to a `hotrod-client.properties` file.
You can configure the Infinispan client with either properties file but `hotrod-client.properties` always takes
priority over `application.properties`.

Additionally, you cannot update configuration properties at runtime.
If you modify `application.properties` or `hotrod-client.properties`, you must rebuild the application before those changes take effect.

== Connecting to Infinispan clusters

Add the following properties to connect to Infinispan Server:

[source,properties]
----
# Infinispan Server address
quarkus.infinispan-client.server-list=localhost:11222

# Authentication
quarkus.infinispan-client.auth-username=admin
quarkus.infinispan-client.auth-password=password

# Infinispan client intelligence
# Use BASIC as a Docker for Mac workaround
quarkus.infinispan-client.client-intelligence=BASIC
----

.Running Infinispan Server

To use the Infinispan client extension, you need at least one running instance of Infinispan Server.

Check out our 5 minute https://infinispan.org/get-started/[Getting stated with Infinispan] tutorial to run Infinispan Server locally.

Infinispan Server also enables authentication and security authorization by default so you need to create a user with permissions.

* If you run the Infinispan Server image, pass the `USER="admin"` and `PASS="password"` parameters.
* If you run the bare metal distribution, use the Command Line Interface (CLI) as follows:
+
[source,bash]
----
$ ./bin/cli.sh user create admin -p password
----

=== Authentication mechanisms

You can use the following authentication mechanisms with the Infinispan client:

* DIGEST-MD5
* PLAIN (recommended only in combination with TLS encryption)
* EXTERNAL

Other authentication mechanisms, such as SCRAM and GSSAPI, are not yet verified with the Infinispan client.

You can find more information on configuring authentication in https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/hotrod_java/hotrod_java.html#hotrod_endpoint_auth-hotrod-client-configuration[Hot Rod Endpoint Authentication Mechanisms].

[NOTE]
====
You must configure authentication in the `hotrod-client.properties` file if you use Dependency Injection.
====

== Serialization (Key Value types support)

By default the client will support keys and values of the following types: byte[],
primitive wrappers (eg. Integer, Long, Double etc.), String, Date and Instant. User types require
some additional steps that are detailed here. Let's say we have the following user classes:

.Author.java
[source,java]
----
public class Author {
   private final String name;
   private final String surname;

   public Author(String name, String surname) {
      this.name = Objects.requireNonNull(name);
      this.surname = Objects.requireNonNull(surname);
   }
   // Getter/Setter/equals/hashCode/toString omitted
}
----

.Book.java
[source,java]
----
public class Book {
   private final String title;
   private final String description;
   private final int publicationYear;
   private final Set<Author> authors;
   private final BigDecimal price;

   public Book(String title, String description, int publicationYear, Set<Author> authors, BigDecimal price) {
      this.title = Objects.requireNonNull(title);
      this.description = Objects.requireNonNull(description);
      this.publicationYear = publicationYear;
      this.authors = Objects.requireNonNull(authors);
      this.price = price;
   }
   // Getter/Setter/equals/hashCode/toString omitted
}
----

Serialization of user types uses a library based on protobuf,
called https://github.com/infinispan/protostream[Protostream].

[TIP]
====
Infinispan caches can store keys and values in different encodings, but recommend using https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers[Protocol Buffers (Protobuf)].

For more information see our https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/encoding/encoding.html[Cache Encoding and Marshalling] guide.
====


=== Annotation based Serialization

This can be done automatically by adding protostream annotations to your user classes.
In addition, a single Initializer annotated interface is required which controls how
the supporting classes are generated.

Here is an example of how the preceding classes should be changed:

.Author.java
[source,java]
----
    @ProtoFactory
    public Author(String name, String surname) {
        this.name = Objects.requireNonNull(name);
        this.surname = Objects.requireNonNull(surname);
    }

    @ProtoField(number = 1)
    public String getName() {
        return name;
    }

    @ProtoField(number = 2)
    public String getSurname() {
        return surname;
    }
----

.Book.java
[source,java]
----
    @ProtoFactory
    public Book(String title, String description, int publicationYear, Set<Author> authors) {
        this.title = Objects.requireNonNull(title);
        this.description = Objects.requireNonNull(description);
        this.publicationYear = publicationYear;
        this.authors = Objects.requireNonNull(authors);
    }

    @ProtoField(number = 1)
    public String getTitle() {
        return title;
    }

    @ProtoField(number = 2)
    public String getDescription() {
        return description;
    }

    @ProtoField(number = 3, defaultValue = "-1")
    public int getPublicationYear() {
        return publicationYear;
    }

    @ProtoField(number = 4)
    public Set<Author> getAuthors() {
        return authors;
    }
----

If your classes have only mutable fields, then the `ProtoFactory` annotation
is not required, assuming your class has a no arg constructor.

Then all that is required is a very simple `GeneratedSchema` interface with an annotation
on it to specify configuration settings

.BooksSchema.java
[source,java]
----
import org.infinispan.protostream.GeneratedSchema;
import org.infinispan.protostream.annotations.AutoProtoSchemaBuilder;
import org.infinispan.protostream.types.java.math.BigDecimalAdapter;

@AutoProtoSchemaBuilder(includeClasses = { Book.class, Author.class, BigDecimalAdapter.class }, schemaPackageName = "book_sample")
interface BookStoreSchema extends GeneratedSchema {
}
----

[TIP]
Protostream provides default Protobuf mappers for commonly used types as `BigDecimal`, included in the `org.infinispan.protostream.types` package.

So in this case we will automatically generate the marshaller and schemas for the included classes and
place them in the schema package automatically. The package does not have to be provided, but if you use Infinispan query capabilities, you must know the generated package.

NOTE: In Quarkus the `schemaFileName` and `schemaFilePath` attributes should NOT be set on the `AutoProtoSchemaBuilder` annotation. Setting either attributes causes native runtime errors.

=== Custom serialization

The previous method is suggested for any case when the user can annotate their classes.
Unfortunately the user may not be able to annotate all classes they will put in the
cache. In this case you must define your schema and create your own Marshaller(s)
yourself.

Protobuf schema:: You can supply a protobuf schema through either one of two ways.
. Proto File
 +
You can put the `.proto` file in the `META-INF` directory of the project. These files will
automatically be picked up at initialization time.
+
.library.proto
----
package book_sample;

message Book {
  required string title = 1;
  required string description = 2;
  required int32 publicationYear = 3; // no native Date type available in Protobuf
  repeated Author authors = 4;
  requited double price = 5; // no native BigDecimal type available in Protobuf
}

message Author {
  required string name = 1;
  required string surname = 2;
}
----
. In Code
 +
Or you can define the proto schema directly in user code by defining a produced bean of type
`org.infinispan.protostream.FileDescriptorSource`.
+
[source,java]
----
   @Produces
   FileDescriptorSource bookProtoDefinition() {
      return FileDescriptorSource.fromString("library.proto", "package book_sample;\n" +
            "\n" +
            "message Book {\n" +
            "  required string title = 1;\n" +
            "  required string description = 2;\n" +
            "  required int32 publicationYear = 3; // no native Date type available in Protobuf\n" +
            "\n" +
            "  repeated Author authors = 4;\n" +
            "\n" +
            "  required double price = 5; // no native BigDecimal type available in Protobuf\n" +
            "}\n" +
            "\n" +
            "message Author {\n" +
            "  required string name = 1;\n" +
            "  required string surname = 2;\n" +
            "}");
   }
----
User Marshaller::
The last thing to do is to provide a `org.infinispan.protostream.MessageMarshaller` implementation
for each user class defined in the proto schema. This class is then provided via `@Produces` in a similar
fashion to the code based proto schema definition above.
+
Here is the Marshaller class for our Author & Book classes.
+
NOTE: The type name must match the `<protobuf package>.<protobuf message>` exactly!
+
.AuthorMarshaller.java
[source,java]
----
public class AuthorMarshaller implements MessageMarshaller<Author> {

   @Override
   public String getTypeName() {
      return "book_sample.Author";
   }

   @Override
   public Class<? extends Author> getJavaClass() {
      return Author.class;
   }

   @Override
   public void writeTo(ProtoStreamWriter writer, Author author) throws IOException {
      writer.writeString("name", author.getName());
      writer.writeString("surname", author.getSurname());
   }

   @Override
   public Author readFrom(ProtoStreamReader reader) throws IOException {
      String name = reader.readString("name");
      String surname = reader.readString("surname");
      return new Author(name, surname);
   }
}
----
+
.BookMarshaller.java
[source,java]
----
public class BookMarshaller implements MessageMarshaller<Book> {

   @Override
   public String getTypeName() {
      return "book_sample.Book";
   }

   @Override
   public Class<? extends Book> getJavaClass() {
      return Book.class;
   }

   @Override
   public void writeTo(ProtoStreamWriter writer, Book book) throws IOException {
      writer.writeString("title", book.getTitle());
      writer.writeString("description", book.getDescription());
      writer.writeInt("publicationYear", book.getPublicationYear());
      writer.writeCollection("authors", book.getAuthors(), Author.class);
      writer.writeDouble("price", book.getPrice().doubleValue());
   }

   @Override
   public Book readFrom(ProtoStreamReader reader) throws IOException {
      String title = reader.readString("title");
      String description = reader.readString("description");
      int publicationYear = reader.readInt("publicationYear");
      Set<Author> authors = reader.readCollection("authors", new HashSet<>(), Author.class);
      BigDecimal price = BigDecimal.valueOf(reader.readDouble("price"));
      return new Book(title, description, publicationYear, authors, price);
   }
}
----
+
And you pass the marshaller by defining the following:
+
[source,java]
----
   @Produces
   MessageMarshaller authorMarshaller() {
      return new AuthorMarshaller();
   }

   @Produces
   MessageMarshaller bookMarshaller() {
      return new BookMarshaller();
   }
----
NOTE: The above produced Marshaller method MUST return `MessageMarshaller` without types or else it will not be found.

== Dependency Injection

As you saw above we support the user injecting Marshaller configuration. You can do the inverse with
the Infinispan client extension providing injection for `RemoteCacheManager` and `RemoteCache` objects.
There is one global `RemoteCacheManager` that takes all of the configuration
parameters setup in the above sections.

It is very simple to inject these components. All you need to do is to add the Inject annotation to
the field, constructor or method. In the below code we utilize field and constructor injection.

.SomeClass.java
[source,java]
----
    @Inject SomeClass(RemoteCacheManager remoteCacheManager) {
       this.remoteCacheManager = remoteCacheManager;
    }

    @Inject @Remote("myCache")
    RemoteCache<String, Book> cache;

    RemoteCacheManager remoteCacheManager;
----

If you notice the `RemoteCache` declaration has an additional optional annotation named `Remote`.
This is a qualifier annotation allowing you to specify which named cache that will be injected. This
annotation is not required and if it is not supplied, the default cache will be injected.

NOTE: Other types may be supported for injection, please see other sections for more information

=== Registering Protobuf Schemas with Infinispan Server
You need to register the generated Protobuf schemas with Infinispan Server to perform queries or convert from
`Protobuf` to other media types such as `JSON`.

[TIP]
You can check the schemas that exist under the `Schemas` tab by logging into
Infinispan Console at `http://localhost:11222`

By default Protobuf schemas generated this way will be registered by this extension when the client first connects.
However, it might be required to handle the registration manually as a schema may evolve over time when used in
production, so you can disable this from occurring by configuring the
`quarkus.infinispan-client.use-schema-registration` to `false`.

To configure the schema manually
please use https://infinispan.org/docs/infinispan-operator/master/operator.html[Infinispan Operator]
for Kubernetes deployments, Infinispan Console,
https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/rest/rest.html#rest_v2_protobuf_schemas[REST API] or the
https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/encoding/encoding.html#registering-sci-remote-caches_marshalling[Hot Rod Java Client].


== Querying

The Infinispan client supports both indexed and non-indexed querying as long as the
`ProtoStreamMarshaller` is configured above. This allows the user to query based on the
properties of the proto schema.

Query builds upon the proto definitions you can configure when setting up the `ProtoStreamMarshaller`.
Either method of Serialization above will automatically register the schema with the server at
startup, meaning that you will automatically gain the ability to query objects stored in the
remote Infinispan Server.

You can read more about https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/developing/developing.html#creating_ickle_queries-querying[querying] in the Infinispan documentation.

You can use either the Query DSL or the Ickle Query language with the Quarkus Infinispan client
extension.

== Counters

Infinispan also has a notion of counters and the Quarkus Infinispan client supports them out of
the box.

The Quarkus Infinispan client extension allows for Dependency Injection
of the `CounterManager` directly. All you need to do is annotate your field, constructor or method
and you get it with no fuss. You can then use counters as you would normally.

[source,java]
----
@Inject
CounterManager counterManager;
----

You can read more about https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/developing/developing.html#clustered_counters[clustered counters] in the Infinispan documentation.

== Near Caching

Near caching is disabled by default, but you can enable it by setting the profile config property
`quarkus.infinispan-client.near-cache-max-entries` to a value greater than 0. You can also configure
a regular expression so that only a subset of caches have near caching applied through the
`quarkus.infinispan-client.near-cache-name-pattern` attribute.

== Encryption

Encryption at this point requires additional steps to get working.

The first step is to configure the `hotrod-client.properties` file to point to your truststore
and/or keystore. This is further detailed https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/hotrod_java/hotrod_java.html#hotrod_encryption[here].

The Infinispan Client extension enables SSL/TLS by default. You can read more about this
at link:native-and-ssl[Using SSL With Native Executables].

== Additional Features

The Infinispan Client has additional features that were not mentioned here. This means this
feature was not tested in a Quarkus environment and they may or may not work. Please let us
know if you need these added!

== Testing helpers

To start a Infinispan Server for your unit tests, Quarkus provides one `QuarkusTestResourceLifecycleManager` that relies on link:https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/hotrod_java/hotrod_java.html#junit-testing[Infinispan Server Test Container].

- `io.quarkus.test.infinispan.client.InfinispanTestResource` will start a single instance on port 11222 with user 'admin' and password 'password'.

To use them, you need to add the `io.quarkus:quarkus-test-infinispan-client` dependency to your pom.xml.

For more information about the usage of a `QuarkusTestResourceLifecycleManager` please read link:getting-started-testing#quarkus-test-resource[Quarkus test resource].

== Configuration Reference

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-infinispan-client.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]
