docs/src/main/asciidoc/kafka-reactive-getting-started.adoc, before:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Getting Started to SmallRye Reactive Messaging with Apache Kafka

include::./attributes.adoc[]

This guide demonstrates how your Quarkus application can utilize SmallRye Reactive Messaging to interact with Apache Kafka.

== Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need:

* less than 15 minutes
* an IDE
* JDK 11+ installed with `JAVA_HOME` configured appropriately
* Apache Maven {maven-version}
* GraalVM installed if you want to run in native mode.

== Architecture

In this guide, we are going to develop two microservices for an application that will ask for some price and receive quotes from providers in real-time.

The first component, the `producer`, will let the user request some quotes over a JAX-RS endpoint.
For each quote request a random identifier is generated and returned to the user, to put the quote request on _pending_.
At the same time the generated request id is sent over a Kafka topic `quote-requests`.

The second component, the `processor`, in turn will read from the `quote-requests` topic put a magic random price to the quote and send it to a Kafka topic named `quotes`.
Lastly, the first component will read the quotes and send them to the browser using server-sent events.
The user will therefore see the quote price updated from _pending_ to the received price in real-time.

// TODO update image
image::kafka-guide-architecture.png[alt=Architecture, align=center]

== Solution

We recommend that you follow the instructions in the next sections and create the application step by step.
However, you can go right to the completed example.

Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}`, or download an {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive].

The solution is located in the `kafka-quickstart` {quickstarts-tree-url}/kafka-quickstart[directory].

== Creating the Maven Project

First, we need to create two projects.
Create the `producer` project with the following command:

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:{quarkus-version}:create \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
    -DprojectArtifactId=kafka-quickstart-producer \
    -DclassName="org.acme.kafka.producer.QuotesResource" \
    -Dpath="/quotes" \
    -Dextensions="resteasy-reactive-jackson,smallrye-reactive-messaging-kafka"
----

This command generates a Maven project, importing the Reactive Messaging and Kafka connector extensions.

If you already have your Quarkus project configured, you can add the `smallrye-reactive-messaging-kafka`
and `resteasy-reactive-jackson` extensions to your project by running the following command in your project base directory:

[source,bash]
----
./mvnw quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="smallrye-reactive-messaging-kafka,resteasy-reactive-jackson"
----

This will add the following to your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-resteasy-reactive-jackson</artifactId>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-smallrye-reactive-messaging-kafka</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

Now create the `processor` project:

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:{quarkus-version}:create \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
    -DprojectArtifactId=kafka-quickstart-processor \
    -DclassName="org.acme.kafka.processor.QuoteProcessor" \
    -Dextensions="smallrye-reactive-messaging-kafka"
----


[TIP]
.Dev Services
====
No need to start a Kafka broker when using the dev mode or for tests.
Quarkus starts a broker for you automatically.
See xref:kafka-dev-services.adoc[Dev Services for Kafka] for details.
====

== The Quote object

The quote class will be used in both `producer` and `processor` projects.
For the sake of simplicity we will duplicate the class.
In both projects, create the `src/main/java/org/acme/kafka/model/Quote.java` file, with the following content:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.kafka.model;

public class Quote {

    public String id;
    public int price;

    /**
    * Default constructor required for Jackson serializer
    */
    public Quote() { }

    public Quote(String id, int price) {
        this.id = id;
        this.price = price;
    }
}
----

JSON representation of `Quote` objects will be used in messages sent to the Kafka topic
and also server-sent events sent to browser clients.

Quarkus has built-in capabilities to deal with JSON Kafka messages.
In a following section we will create serializer/deserializer classes for Jackson.

== Sending quote request

Inside the `producer` project locate the generated  `src/main/java/org/acme/kafka/producer/QuotesResource.java` file, and add the following content:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.kafka.producer;

import java.util.UUID;

import javax.inject.Inject;
import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.POST;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

import org.acme.kafka.model.Quote;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.reactive.messaging.Channel;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.reactive.messaging.Emitter;

import io.smallrye.mutiny.Multi;

@Path("/quotes")
public class QuotesResource {

    @Inject
    @Channel("quote-requests") Emitter<String> quoteRequestEmitter; // <1>

    /**
     * Endpoint to generate a new quote request id and send it to "quote-requests" Kafka topic using the emitter.
     */
    @POST
    @Path("/request")
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String createRequest() {
        UUID uuid = UUID.randomUUID();
        quoteRequestEmitter.send(uuid.toString()); // <2>
        return uuid.toString();
    }
}
----
<1> Inject a Reactive Messaging `Emitter` to send messsages to the `quote-requests` channel.
<2> On a post request, generate a random UUID and send it to the Kafka topic using the emitter.

This channel is mapped to Kafka using the configuration we will add to the `application.properties` file:

[source, properties]
----
# Configure the outgoing Kafka topic quote-requests
mp.messaging.outgoing.quote-requests.connector=smallrye-kafka
----

All we need to specify is the `smallrye-kafka` connector.
By default reactive messaging will map the channel name `quote-requests` to the Kafka topic name.
The serializer for `String` is automatically configured.

== Processing quote requests

Now let's consume the quote request and give out a price.
Inside the `processor` project locate the `src/main/java/org/acme/kafka/processor/QuoteProcessor.java` file and add the following:

[source, java]
----
package org.acme.kafka.processor;

import java.util.Random;

import javax.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;

import org.acme.kafka.model.Quote;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.reactive.messaging.Incoming;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.reactive.messaging.Outgoing;

import io.smallrye.reactive.messaging.annotations.Blocking;

/**
 * A bean consuming data from the "request" Kafka topic and giving out a random quote.
 * The result is pushed to the "quotes" Kafka topic.
 */
@ApplicationScoped
public class QuotesProcessor {

    private Random random = new Random();

    @Incoming("requests")       // <1>
    @Outgoing("quotes")         // <2>
    @Blocking                   // <3>
    public Quote process(String quoteRequest) throws InterruptedException {
        // simulate some hard working task
        Thread.sleep(200);
        return new Quote(quoteRequest, random.nextInt(100));
    }
}

----
<1> Indicates that the method consumes the items from the `requests` channel
<2> Indicates that the objects returned by the method are sent to the `quotes` channel
<3> Indicates that the processing is _blocking_ and cannot be run on the caller thread.

The `process` method is called for every Kafka _record_ from the `quote-requests` topic, and will send a `Quote` object to the `quotes` topic.

As with the previous example we need to configure the connectors in the `application.properties` file:

[source, properties]
----
%dev.quarkus.http.port=8081

# Configure the incoming Kafka topic `quote-requests`
mp.messaging.incoming.requests.connector=smallrye-kafka
mp.messaging.incoming.requests.topic=quote-requests
mp.messaging.incoming.requests.auto.offset.reset=earliest

# Configure the outgoing Kafka topic `quotes`
mp.messaging.outgoing.quotes.connector=smallrye-kafka
mp.messaging.outgoing.quotes.value.serializer=io.quarkus.kafka.client.serialization.ObjectMapperSerializer
----

Note that in this case we have one incoming and one outgoing connector configuration, each one distinctly named.
The configuration keys are structured as follows:

`mp.messaging.[outgoing|incoming].{channel-name}.property=value`

The `channel-name` segment must match the value set in the `@Incoming` and `@Outgoing` annotation:

* `quote-requests` -> Kafka topic from which we read the quote requests
* `quotes` -> Kafka topic in which we write the quotes

[NOTE]
====
More details about this configuration is available on the https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#producerconfigs[Producer configuration] and https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#consumerconfigs[Consumer configuration] section from the Kafka documentation. These properties are configured with the prefix `kafka`. An exhaustive list of configuration properties is available in <<kafka-configuration>>.
====

Also for the outgoing configuration we specified the serializer because we are sending a `Quote` object as the message payload.

Quarkus provides default implementations for Kafka serializer/deserializer pairs using Jackson `ObjectMapper`.
`ObjectMapperSerializer` can be used to serialize all objects via Jackson.

== Receiving quotes

Back to our `producer` project.
Let's modify the `QuotesResource` to consume quotes, bind it to a JAX-RS resource and send events to clients:

[source,java]
----
import io.smallrye.mutiny.Multi;
[...]

@Inject
@Channel("quotes") Multi<Quote> quotes;     // <1>

/**
 * Endpoint retrieving the "quotes" Kafka topic and sending the items to a server sent event.
 */
@GET
@Produces(MediaType.SERVER_SENT_EVENTS) // <2>
public Multi<Quote> stream() {
    return quotes; // <3>
}
----
<1> Injects the `quotes` channel using the `@Channel` qualifier
<2> Indicates that the content is sent using `Server Sent Events`
<3> Returns the stream (_Reactive Stream_)

Again we need to configure the incoming `quotes` channel inside `producer` project.
Add the following inside `application.properties` file:

[source, properties]
----
# Configure the outgoing Kafka topic quote-requests
mp.messaging.outgoing.quote-requests.connector=smallrye-kafka

# Configure the incoming Kafka topic quotes
mp.messaging.incoming.quotes.connector=smallrye-kafka
----

== JSON serialization via Jackson

Finally, we will configure JSON serialization for messages using Jackson.
Previously we've seen the usage of `ObjectMapperSerializer` to serialize objects via Jackson.
For the corresponding deserializer class, we need to create a subclass of `ObjectMapperDeserializer`.

So, let's create it inside `producer` project on `src/main/java/org/acme/kafka/model/QuoteDeserializer.java`

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.kafka.model;

import io.quarkus.kafka.client.serialization.ObjectMapperDeserializer;

public class QuoteDeserializer extends ObjectMapperDeserializer<Quote> {
    public QuoteDeserializer() {
        // pass the class to the parent.
        super(Quote.class);
    }
}
----

No need to add any configuration for this inside `application.properties` file.
Quarkus will automatically detect this serializer.

[TIP]
====
.Message serialization in Kafka
In this example we used Jackson to serialize/deserialize Kafka messages.
For more options on message serialization see <<kafka-serialization>>.

We strongly suggest adopting a contract-first approach using a schema registry.
To learn more about how to use Apache Kafka with the schema registry and Avro follow the link:kafka-schema-registry-avro.adoc[Using Apache Kafka with Schema Registry and Avro] guide.
====

== The HTML page

Final touch, the HTML page reading the converted prices using SSE.

Create inside the `producer` project `src/main/resources/META-INF/resources/quotes.html` file, with the following content:

[source, html]
----
<!DOCTYPE html> <html lang="en"> <head> <meta charset="UTF-8"> <title>Prices</title>

    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"
          href="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/patternfly/3.24.0/css/patternfly.min.css">
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"
          href="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/patternfly/3.24.0/css/patternfly-additions.min.css">
</head>
<body>
<div class="container">
    <div class="card">
        <div class="card-body">
            <h2 class="card-title">Quotes</h2>
            <button class="btn btn-info" id="request-quote">Request Quote</button>
            <div class="quotes"></div>
        </div>
    </div>
</div>
</body>
<script src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-3.6.0.min.js"></script>
<script>
    $("#request-quote").click((event) => {
        fetch("/quotes/request", {method: "POST"})
        .then(res => res.text())
        .then(qid => {
            var row = $(`<h4 class='col-md-12' id='${qid}'>Quote # <i>${qid}</i> | <strong>Pending</strong></h4>`);
            $(".quotes").append(row);
        });
    });
    var source = new EventSource("/quotes");
    source.onmessage = (event) => {
      var json = JSON.parse(event.data);
      $(`#${json.id}`).html(function(index, html) {
        return html.replace("Pending", `\$\xA0${json.price}`);
      });
    };
</script>
</html>
----

Nothing spectacular here.
On each received price, it updates the page.

== Get it running

You just need to run both applications using:

[source,bash]
----
./mvnw -f producer quarkus:dev
./mvnw -f processor quarkus:dev
----

Quarkus starts a Kafka broker automatically, configures the application and shares the Kafka broker instance between different applications.
See xref:kafka-dev-services.adoc[Dev Services for Kafka] for more details.

Open `http://localhost:8080/quotes.html` in your browser.

== Running in JVM or Native mode

When not running in dev or test mode, you will need to start your Kafka broker.
You can follow the instructions from the https://kafka.apache.org/quickstart[Apache Kafka web site] or create a `docker-compose.yaml` file with the following content:

[source, yaml]
----
version: '2'

services:

  zookeeper:
    image: quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.23.0-kafka-2.8.0
    command: [
      "sh", "-c",
      "bin/zookeeper-server-start.sh config/zookeeper.properties"
    ]
    ports:
      - "2181:2181"
    environment:
      LOG_DIR: /tmp/logs
    networks:
      - kafkaquickstart-network

  kafka:
    image: quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.23.0-kafka-2.8.0
    command: [
      "sh", "-c",
      "bin/kafka-server-start.sh config/server.properties --override listeners=$${KAFKA_LISTENERS} --override advertised.listeners=$${KAFKA_ADVERTISED_LISTENERS} --override zookeeper.connect=$${KAFKA_ZOOKEEPER_CONNECT}"
    ]
    depends_on:
      - zookeeper
    ports:
      - "9092:9092"
    environment:
      LOG_DIR: "/tmp/logs"
      KAFKA_ADVERTISED_LISTENERS: PLAINTEXT://kafka:9092
      KAFKA_LISTENERS: PLAINTEXT://0.0.0.0:9092
      KAFKA_ZOOKEEPER_CONNECT: zookeeper:2181
    networks:
      - kafkaquickstart-network

  producer:
    image: quarkus-quickstarts/kafka-quickstart-producer:1.0
    build:
      context: producer
      dockerfile: src/main/docker/Dockerfile.${QUARKUS_MODE:-jvm}
    environment:
      KAFKA_BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS: kafka:9092
    ports:
      - "8080:8080"
    networks:
      - kafkaquickstart-network

  processor:
    image: quarkus-quickstarts/kafka-quickstart-processor:1.0
    build:
      context: processor
      dockerfile: src/main/docker/Dockerfile.${QUARKUS_MODE:-jvm}
    environment:
      KAFKA_BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS: kafka:9092
    networks:
      - kafkaquickstart-network

networks:
  kafkaquickstart-network:
    name: kafkaquickstart
----

Make sure you first build both applications in JVM mode with:

[source, bash]
----
./mvnw package
----

Once packaged, run `docker-compose up`.

NOTE: This is a development cluster, do not use in production.

== Going further

This guide has shown how you can interact with Kafka using Quarkus.
It utilizes SmallRye Reactive Messaging to build data streaming applications.

If you want to go further check the documentation of https://smallrye.io/smallrye-reactive-messaging[SmallRye Reactive Messaging], the implementation used in Quarkus.

For the exhaustive list of features and configuration options check the
xref:kafka.adoc[Reference guide for Apache Kafka Extension].

Commit message:

Added architecture schema and UI screenshot.
Small fixes

docs/src/main/asciidoc/kafka-reactive-getting-started.adoc, after:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Getting Started to SmallRye Reactive Messaging with Apache Kafka

include::./attributes.adoc[]

This guide demonstrates how your Quarkus application can utilize SmallRye Reactive Messaging to interact with Apache Kafka.

== Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need:

* less than 15 minutes
* an IDE
* JDK 11+ installed with `JAVA_HOME` configured appropriately
* Apache Maven {maven-version}
* GraalVM installed if you want to run in native mode.

== Architecture

In this guide, we are going to develop two applications communicating with Kafka.
The first application sends a _quote request_ to Kafka and consumes Kafka messages from the _quote_ topic.
The second application receives the _quote request_ and sends a _quote_ back.

image::kafka-qs-architecture.png[alt=Architecture, align=center]

The first application, the `producer`, will let the user request some quotes over a HTTP endpoint.
For each quote request a random identifier is generated and returned to the user, to put the quote request on _pending_.
At the same time the generated request id is sent over a Kafka topic `quote-requests`.

image::kafka-qs-app-screenshot.png[alt=Producer App UI, align=center]

The second application, the `processor`, in turn, will read from the `quote-requests` topic put a random price to the quote, and send it to a Kafka topic named `quotes`.

Lastly, the `producer` will read the quotes and send them to the browser using server-sent events.
The user will therefore see the quote price updated from _pending_ to the received price in real-time.

== Solution

We recommend that you follow the instructions in the next sections and create the application step by step.
However, you can go right to the completed example.

Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}`, or download an {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive].

The solution is located in the `kafka-quickstart` {quickstarts-tree-url}/kafka-quickstart[directory].

== Creating the Maven Project

First, we need to create two projects.
Create the `producer` project with the following command:

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:{quarkus-version}:create \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
    -DprojectArtifactId=kafka-quickstart-producer \
    -DclassName="org.acme.kafka.producer.QuotesResource" \
    -Dpath="/quotes" \
    -Dextensions="resteasy-reactive-jackson,smallrye-reactive-messaging-kafka"
----

This command generates a Maven project, importing the Reactive Messaging and Kafka connector extensions.

If you already have your Quarkus project configured, you can add the `smallrye-reactive-messaging-kafka`
and `resteasy-reactive-jackson` extensions to your project by running the following command in your project base directory:

[source,bash]
----
./mvnw quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="smallrye-reactive-messaging-kafka,resteasy-reactive-jackson"
----

This will add the following to your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-resteasy-reactive-jackson</artifactId>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-smallrye-reactive-messaging-kafka</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

Now create the `processor` project:

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:{quarkus-version}:create \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
    -DprojectArtifactId=kafka-quickstart-processor \
    -DclassName="org.acme.kafka.processor.QuoteProcessor" \
    -Dextensions="smallrye-reactive-messaging-kafka"
----


[TIP]
.Dev Services
====
No need to start a Kafka broker when using the dev mode or for tests.
Quarkus starts a broker for you automatically.
See xref:kafka-dev-services.adoc[Dev Services for Kafka] for details.
====

== The Quote object

The quote class will be used in both `producer` and `processor` projects.
For the sake of simplicity we will duplicate the class.
In both projects, create the `src/main/java/org/acme/kafka/model/Quote.java` file, with the following content:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.kafka.model;

public class Quote {

    public String id;
    public int price;

    /**
    * Default constructor required for Jackson serializer
    */
    public Quote() { }

    public Quote(String id, int price) {
        this.id = id;
        this.price = price;
    }
}
----

JSON representation of `Quote` objects will be used in messages sent to the Kafka topic
and also server-sent events sent to browser clients.

Quarkus has built-in capabilities to deal with JSON Kafka messages.
In a following section we will create serializer/deserializer classes for Jackson.

== Sending quote request

Inside the `producer` project locate the generated  `src/main/java/org/acme/kafka/producer/QuotesResource.java` file, and add the following content:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.kafka.producer;

import java.util.UUID;

import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.POST;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

import org.acme.kafka.model.Quote;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.reactive.messaging.Channel;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.reactive.messaging.Emitter;

import io.smallrye.mutiny.Multi;

@Path("/quotes")
public class QuotesResource {

    @Channel("quote-requests") Emitter<String> quoteRequestEmitter; // <1>

    /**
     * Endpoint to generate a new quote request id and send it to "quote-requests" Kafka topic using the emitter.
     */
    @POST
    @Path("/request")
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String createRequest() {
        UUID uuid = UUID.randomUUID();
        quoteRequestEmitter.send(uuid.toString()); // <2>
        return uuid.toString();
    }
}
----
<1> Inject a Reactive Messaging `Emitter` to send messsages to the `quote-requests` channel.
<2> On a post request, generate a random UUID and send it to the Kafka topic using the emitter.

This channel is mapped to Kafka using the configuration we will add to the `application.properties` file:

[source, properties]
----
# Configure the outgoing Kafka topic quote-requests
mp.messaging.outgoing.quote-requests.connector=smallrye-kafka
----

All we need to specify is the `smallrye-kafka` connector.
By default reactive messaging will map the channel name `quote-requests` to the Kafka topic name.
The serializer for `String` is automatically configured.

== Processing quote requests

Now let's consume the quote request and give out a price.
Inside the `processor` project locate the `src/main/java/org/acme/kafka/processor/QuoteProcessor.java` file and add the following:

[source, java]
----
package org.acme.kafka.processor;

import java.util.Random;

import javax.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;

import org.acme.kafka.model.Quote;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.reactive.messaging.Incoming;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.reactive.messaging.Outgoing;

import io.smallrye.reactive.messaging.annotations.Blocking;

/**
 * A bean consuming data from the "request" Kafka topic and giving out a random quote.
 * The result is pushed to the "quotes" Kafka topic.
 */
@ApplicationScoped
public class QuotesProcessor {

    private Random random = new Random();

    @Incoming("requests")       // <1>
    @Outgoing("quotes")         // <2>
    @Blocking                   // <3>
    public Quote process(String quoteRequest) throws InterruptedException {
        // simulate some hard working task
        Thread.sleep(200);
        return new Quote(quoteRequest, random.nextInt(100));
    }
}

----
<1> Indicates that the method consumes the items from the `requests` channel
<2> Indicates that the objects returned by the method are sent to the `quotes` channel
<3> Indicates that the processing is _blocking_ and cannot be run on the caller thread.

The `process` method is called for every Kafka _record_ from the `quote-requests` topic, and will send a `Quote` object to the `quotes` topic.

As with the previous example we need to configure the connectors in the `application.properties` file:

[source, properties]
----
%dev.quarkus.http.port=8081

# Configure the incoming Kafka topic `quote-requests`
mp.messaging.incoming.requests.connector=smallrye-kafka
mp.messaging.incoming.requests.topic=quote-requests
mp.messaging.incoming.requests.auto.offset.reset=earliest

# Configure the outgoing Kafka topic `quotes`
mp.messaging.outgoing.quotes.connector=smallrye-kafka
mp.messaging.outgoing.quotes.value.serializer=io.quarkus.kafka.client.serialization.ObjectMapperSerializer
----

Note that in this case we have one incoming and one outgoing connector configuration, each one distinctly named.
The configuration keys are structured as follows:

`mp.messaging.[outgoing|incoming].{channel-name}.property=value`

The `channel-name` segment must match the value set in the `@Incoming` and `@Outgoing` annotation:

* `quote-requests` -> Kafka topic from which we read the quote requests
* `quotes` -> Kafka topic in which we write the quotes

[NOTE]
====
More details about this configuration is available on the https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#producerconfigs[Producer configuration] and https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#consumerconfigs[Consumer configuration] section from the Kafka documentation. These properties are configured with the prefix `kafka`. An exhaustive list of configuration properties is available in
xref:kafka.adoc#kafka-configuration[Using Apache Kafka with Reactive Messaging - Configuration].
====

Also for the outgoing configuration we specified the serializer because we are sending a `Quote` object as the message payload.

Quarkus provides default implementations for Kafka serializer/deserializer pairs using Jackson `ObjectMapper`.
`ObjectMapperSerializer` can be used to serialize all objects via Jackson.

== Receiving quotes

Back to our `producer` project.
Let's modify the `QuotesResource` to consume quotes, bind it to a JAX-RS resource and send events to clients:

[source,java]
----
import io.smallrye.mutiny.Multi;
[...]

@Channel("quotes") Multi<Quote> quotes;     // <1>

/**
 * Endpoint retrieving the "quotes" Kafka topic and sending the items to a server sent event.
 */
@GET
@Produces(MediaType.SERVER_SENT_EVENTS) // <2>
public Multi<Quote> stream() {
    return quotes; // <3>
}
----
<1> Injects the `quotes` channel using the `@Channel` qualifier
<2> Indicates that the content is sent using `Server Sent Events`
<3> Returns the stream (_Reactive Stream_)

Again we need to configure the incoming `quotes` channel inside `producer` project.
Add the following inside `application.properties` file:

[source, properties]
----
# Configure the outgoing Kafka topic quote-requests
mp.messaging.outgoing.quote-requests.connector=smallrye-kafka

# Configure the incoming Kafka topic quotes
mp.messaging.incoming.quotes.connector=smallrye-kafka
----

== JSON serialization via Jackson

Finally, we will configure JSON serialization for messages using Jackson.
Previously we've seen the usage of `ObjectMapperSerializer` to serialize objects via Jackson.
For the corresponding deserializer class, we need to create a subclass of `ObjectMapperDeserializer`.

So, let's create it inside `producer` project on `src/main/java/org/acme/kafka/model/QuoteDeserializer.java`

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.kafka.model;

import io.quarkus.kafka.client.serialization.ObjectMapperDeserializer;

public class QuoteDeserializer extends ObjectMapperDeserializer<Quote> {
    public QuoteDeserializer() {
        // pass the class to the parent.
        super(Quote.class);
    }
}
----

No need to add any configuration for this inside `application.properties` file.
Quarkus will automatically detect this serializer.

[TIP]
====
.Message serialization in Kafka
In this example we used Jackson to serialize/deserialize Kafka messages.
For more options on message serialization see
xref:kafka.adoc#kafka-serialization[Using Apache Kafka with Reactive Messaging - Serialization].

We strongly suggest adopting a contract-first approach using a schema registry.
To learn more about how to use Apache Kafka with the schema registry and Avro follow the
xref:kafka-schema-registry-avro.adoc[Using Apache Kafka with Schema Registry and Avro] guide.
====

== The HTML page

Final touch, the HTML page reading the converted prices using SSE.

Create inside the `producer` project `src/main/resources/META-INF/resources/quotes.html` file, with the following content:

[source, html]
----
<!DOCTYPE html> <html lang="en"> <head> <meta charset="UTF-8"> <title>Quotes</title>

    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"
          href="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/patternfly/3.24.0/css/patternfly.min.css">
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"
          href="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/patternfly/3.24.0/css/patternfly-additions.min.css">
</head>
<body>
<div class="container">
    <div class="card">
        <div class="card-body">
            <h2 class="card-title">Quotes</h2>
            <button class="btn btn-info" id="request-quote">Request Quote</button>
            <div class="quotes"></div>
        </div>
    </div>
</div>
</body>
<script src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-3.6.0.min.js"></script>
<script>
    $("#request-quote").click((event) => {
        fetch("/quotes/request", {method: "POST"})
        .then(res => res.text())
        .then(qid => {
            var row = $(`<h4 class='col-md-12' id='${qid}'>Quote # <i>${qid}</i> | <strong>Pending</strong></h4>`);
            $(".quotes").append(row);
        });
    });
    var source = new EventSource("/quotes");
    source.onmessage = (event) => {
      var json = JSON.parse(event.data);
      $(`#${json.id}`).html(function(index, html) {
        return html.replace("Pending", `\$\xA0${json.price}`);
      });
    };
</script>
</html>
----

Nothing spectacular here.
On each received quote, it updates the page.

== Get it running

You just need to run both applications using:

[source,bash]
----
./mvnw -f producer quarkus:dev
----

And in a separate terminal:

[source, bash]
----
./mvnw -f processor quarkus:dev
----

Quarkus starts a Kafka broker automatically, configures the application and shares the Kafka broker instance between different applications.
See xref:kafka-dev-services.adoc[Dev Services for Kafka] for more details.

Open `http://localhost:8080/quotes.html` in your browser and request some quotes by clicking the button.

== Running in JVM or Native mode

When not running in dev or test mode, you will need to start your Kafka broker.
You can follow the instructions from the https://kafka.apache.org/quickstart[Apache Kafka web site] or create a `docker-compose.yaml` file with the following content:

[source, yaml]
----
version: '2'

services:

  zookeeper:
    image: quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.23.0-kafka-2.8.0
    command: [
      "sh", "-c",
      "bin/zookeeper-server-start.sh config/zookeeper.properties"
    ]
    ports:
      - "2181:2181"
    environment:
      LOG_DIR: /tmp/logs
    networks:
      - kafkaquickstart-network

  kafka:
    image: quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.23.0-kafka-2.8.0
    command: [
      "sh", "-c",
      "bin/kafka-server-start.sh config/server.properties --override listeners=$${KAFKA_LISTENERS} --override advertised.listeners=$${KAFKA_ADVERTISED_LISTENERS} --override zookeeper.connect=$${KAFKA_ZOOKEEPER_CONNECT}"
    ]
    depends_on:
      - zookeeper
    ports:
      - "9092:9092"
    environment:
      LOG_DIR: "/tmp/logs"
      KAFKA_ADVERTISED_LISTENERS: PLAINTEXT://kafka:9092
      KAFKA_LISTENERS: PLAINTEXT://0.0.0.0:9092
      KAFKA_ZOOKEEPER_CONNECT: zookeeper:2181
    networks:
      - kafkaquickstart-network

  producer:
    image: quarkus-quickstarts/kafka-quickstart-producer:1.0
    build:
      context: producer
      dockerfile: src/main/docker/Dockerfile.${QUARKUS_MODE:-jvm}
    environment:
      KAFKA_BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS: kafka:9092
    ports:
      - "8080:8080"
    networks:
      - kafkaquickstart-network

  processor:
    image: quarkus-quickstarts/kafka-quickstart-processor:1.0
    build:
      context: processor
      dockerfile: src/main/docker/Dockerfile.${QUARKUS_MODE:-jvm}
    environment:
      KAFKA_BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS: kafka:9092
    networks:
      - kafkaquickstart-network

networks:
  kafkaquickstart-network:
    name: kafkaquickstart
----

Make sure you first build both applications in JVM mode with:

[source, bash]
----
./mvnw package
----

Once packaged, run `docker-compose up`.

NOTE: This is a development cluster, do not use in production.

== Going further

This guide has shown how you can interact with Kafka using Quarkus.
It utilizes SmallRye Reactive Messaging to build data streaming applications.

If you want to go further check the documentation of https://smallrye.io/smallrye-reactive-messaging[SmallRye Reactive Messaging].

For the exhaustive list of features and configuration options check the
xref:kafka.adoc[Reference guide for Apache Kafka Extension].
