docs/src/main/asciidoc/neo4j.adoc, before:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Neo4j
:neo4j_version: 4.0.0

include::./attributes.adoc[]
:extension-status: preview

https://neo4j.com[Neo4j] is a graph database management system developed by Neo4j, Inc. Neo4j is a native graph database focused not only on the data itself, but especially on the relations between data.
Neo4j stores data as a property graph, which consists of vertices or nodes as we call them, connected with edges or relationships.
Both of them can have properties.

Neo4j offers Cypher, a declarative query language much like SQL.
Cypher is used to for both querying the graph and creating or updating nodes and relationships.
As a declarative language it used to tell the database what to do and not how to do it.

NOTE: Learn more about Cypher in the https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/[Neo4j Cypher manual].
      Cypher is not only available in Neo4j, but for example coming to https://github.com/opencypher/morpheus[Apache Spark].
      A spec called http://www.opencypher.org[OpenCypher] is available, too.

Clients communicate over the so called Bolt protocol with the database.

Neo4j - as the most popular graph database according to DB-Engines ranking - provides a variety of drivers for various languages.

The Quarkus Neo4j extension is based on the official https://github.com/neo4j/neo4j-java-driver[Neo4j Java Driver].
The extension provides an instance of the driver configured ready for usage in any Quarkus application.
You will be able to issue arbitrary Cypher statements over Bolt with this extension.
Those statements can be simple CRUD statements as well as complex queries, calling graph algorithms and more.

The driver itself is released under the Apache 2.0 license,
while Neo4j itself is available in a GPL3-licensed open-source "community edition",
with online backup and high availability extensions licensed under a closed-source commercial license.

include::./status-include.adoc[]

== Programming model

The driver and thus the Quarkus extension support three different programming models:

* Blocking database access (much like standard JDBC)
* Asynchronous programming based on JDK's completable futures and related infrastructure
* Reactive programming based on http://www.reactive-streams.org[Reactive Streams]

The reactive programming model is only available when connected against a 4.0+ version of Neo4j.
Reactive programming in Neo4j is fully end-to-end reactive and therefore requires a server that supports backpressure.

In this guide you will learn how to

* Add the Neo4j extension to your project
* Configure the driver
* And how to use the driver to access a Neo4j database

This guide will focus on asynchronous access to Neo4j, as this is ready to use for everyone.
At the end of this guide, there will be a reactive version, which needs however a 4.0 database version.

== The domain

As with some of the other guides, the application shall manage fruit entities.

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.neo4j;

public class Fruit {

    public Long id;

    public String name;

    public Fruit() {
        // This is needed for the REST-Easy JSON Binding
    }

    public Fruit(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

    public Fruit(Long id, String name) {
        this.id = id;
        this.name = name;
    }
}
----

== Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need:

* JDK 11+ installed with `JAVA_HOME` configured appropriately
* an IDE
* Apache Maven {maven-version}
* Access to a Neo4j Database
* Optional Docker for your system

=== Setup Neo4j

The easiest way to start a Neo4j instance is a locally installed Docker environment.

[source,bash,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
docker run --publish=7474:7474 --publish=7687:7687 -e 'NEO4J_AUTH=neo4j/secret' neo4j:{neo4j_version}
----

This starts a Neo4j instance, that publishes its Bolt port on `7687` and a web interface on http://localhost:7474.

Have a look at the https://neo4j.com/download/?ref=product[download page] for other options to get started with the product itself.

== Solution

We recommend that you follow the instructions in the next sections and create the application step by step.
However, you can go right to the completed example.

Clone the Git repository: git clone https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts.git, or download an archive.

The solution is located in the `neo4j-quickstart` {quickstarts-tree-url}/neo4j-quickstart[directory].
It contains a very simple UI to use the JAX-RS resources created here, too.

== Creating the Maven project

First, we need a new project. Create a new project with the following command:

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn io.quarkus.platform:quarkus-maven-plugin:{quarkus-version}:create \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
    -DprojectArtifactId=neo4j-quickstart \
    -DclassName="org.acme.datasource.GreetingResource" \
    -Dextensions="resteasy,neo4j,resteasy-jackson"
cd neo4j-quickstart
----

It generates:

* the Maven structure
* a landing page accessible on `http://localhost:8080`
* example `Dockerfile` files for both `native` and `jvm` modes
* the application configuration file
* an `org.acme.datasource.GreetingResource` resource
* an associated test

The Neo4j extension has been added already to your `pom.xml`.
In addition, we added `resteasy-jackson`, which allows us to expose `Fruit` instances over HTTP in the JSON format via JAX-RS resources.
If you have an already created project, the `neo4j` extension can be added to an existing Quarkus project with the `add-extension` command:

[source,bash]
----
./mvnw quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="neo4j"
----

Otherwise, you can manually add this to the dependencies section of your `pom.xml` file:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-neo4j</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

== Configuring

The Neo4j driver can be configured with standard Quarkus properties:

[source,properties]
.src/main/resources/application.properties
----
# Those are the default values and are implicitly assumed
quarkus.neo4j.uri = bolt://localhost:7687
quarkus.neo4j.authentication.username = neo4j
quarkus.neo4j.authentication.password = secret
----

You'll recognize the authentication here that you passed on to the docker command above.

Having done that, the driver is ready to use, there are however other configuration options, detailed below.

[[dev-services]]
=== Dev Services (Configuration Free Databases)

Quarkus supports a feature called Dev Services that allows you to create various datasources without any config.
In the case of Neo4j this support applies to the single Neo4j driver instance.
Dev Services will bring up a Neo4j container if you didn't explicit add the default values or configured custom values for
any of `quarkus.neo4j.uri`, `quarkus.neo4j.authentication.username` or `quarkus.neo4j.authentication.password`.
If Neo4j seems to be reachable via the default properties, Dev Services will also step back.

Otherwise, Quarkus will automatically start a Neo4j container when running tests or dev-mode,
and automatically configure the connection.

When running the production version of the application, the Neo4j connection need to be configured as normal,
so if you want to include a production database config in your `application.properties` and continue to use Dev Services
we recommend that you use the `%prod.` profile to define your Neo4j settings.

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-neo4j-config-group-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Using the driver

=== General remarks

The result of a statement consists usually of one or more `org.neo4j.driver.Record`.
Those records contain arbitrary values, supported by the driver.
If you return a node of the graph, it will be a `org.neo4j.driver.types.Node`.

We add the following method to the `Fruit`, as a convenient way to create them:

[source,java]
----
public static Fruit from(Node node) {
    return new Fruit(node.id(), node.get("name").asString());
}
----

Add a `FruitResource` skeleton like this and `@Inject` a `org.neo4j.driver.Driver` instance:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/org/acme/neo4j/FruitResource.java
----
package org.acme.neo4j;

import javax.inject.Inject;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;

import org.neo4j.driver.Driver;

@Path("fruits")
public class FruitResource {

    @Inject
    Driver driver;
}
----

=== Reading nodes

Add the following method to the fruit resource:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/org/acme/neo4j/FruitResource.java
----
@GET
public CompletionStage<Response> get() {
    AsyncSession session = driver.asyncSession(); // <1>
    return session
        .runAsync("MATCH (f:Fruit) RETURN f ORDER BY f.name")  // <2>
        .thenCompose(cursor ->  // <3>
            cursor.listAsync(record -> Fruit.from(record.get("f").asNode()))
        )
        .thenCompose(fruits ->  // <4>
            session.closeAsync().thenApply(signal -> fruits)
        )
        .thenApply(Response::ok) // <5>
        .thenApply(ResponseBuilder::build);
}
----
<1> Open a new, asynchronous session with Neo4j
<2> Execute a query. This is a Cypher statement.
<3> Retrieve a cursor, list the results and create ``Fruit``s.
<4> Close the session after processing
<5> Create a JAX-RS response

Now start Quarkus in `dev` mode with:

[source,bash]
----
./mvnw compile quarkus:dev
----

and retrieve the endpoint like this

[source,bash]
----
curl localhost:8080/fruits
----

There are not any fruits, so let's create some.

=== Creating nodes

The `POST` method looks similar.
It uses transaction functions of the driver:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/org/acme/neo4j/FruitResource.java
----
@POST
public CompletionStage<Response> create(Fruit fruit) {
    AsyncSession session = driver.asyncSession();
    return session
        .writeTransactionAsync(tx -> tx
            .runAsync("CREATE (f:Fruit {name: $name}) RETURN f", Values.parameters("name", fruit.name))
            .thenCompose(fn -> fn.singleAsync())
        )
        .thenApply(record -> Fruit.from(record.get("f").asNode()))
        .thenCompose(persistedFruit -> session.closeAsync().thenApply(signal -> persistedFruit))
        .thenApply(persistedFruit -> Response
            .created(URI.create("/fruits/" + persistedFruit.id))
            .build()
        );
}
----

As you can see, we are now using a Cypher statement with named parameters (The `$name` of the fruit).
The node is returned, a `Fruit` entity created and then mapped to a `201` created response.

A curl request against this path may look like this:

[source,bash]
----
curl -v -X "POST" "http://localhost:8080/fruits" \
     -H 'Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8' \
     -d $'{
  "name": "Banana"
}'
----

The response contains an URI that shall return single nodes.

=== Read single nodes

This time, we ask for a read-only transaction.
We also add some exception handling, in case the resource is called with an invalid id:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/org/acme/neo4j/FruitResource.java
----
@GET
@Path("{id}")
public CompletionStage<Response> getSingle(@PathParam("id") Long id) {
    AsyncSession session = driver.asyncSession();
    return session
        .readTransactionAsync(tx -> tx
            .runAsync("MATCH (f:Fruit) WHERE id(f) = $id RETURN f", Values.parameters("id", id))
            .thenCompose(fn -> fn.singleAsync())
    )
    .handle((record, exception) -> {
        if(exception != null) {
            Throwable source = exception;
            if(exception instanceof CompletionException) {
                source = ((CompletionException)exception).getCause();
            }
            Status status = Status.INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR;
            if(source instanceof NoSuchRecordException) {
                status = Status.NOT_FOUND;
            }
            return Response.status(status).build();
        } else  {
            return Response.ok(Fruit.from(record.get("f").asNode())).build();
        }
    })
    .thenCompose(response -> session.closeAsync().thenApply(signal -> response));
}
----

A request may look like this:

[source,bash]
----
curl localhost:8080/fruits/42
----

NOTE: In case Neo4j has been setup as a cluster, the transaction mode is used to decide whether a request is routed
      to a leader or a follower instance. Write transactions must be handled by a leader, whereas read-only transactions
      can be handled by followers.

=== Deleting nodes

Finally, we want to get rid of fruits again and we add the `DELETE` method:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/org/acme/neo4j/FruitResource.java
----
@DELETE
@Path("{id}")
public CompletionStage<Response> delete(@PathParam("id") Long id) {

    AsyncSession session = driver.asyncSession();
    return session
        .writeTransactionAsync(tx -> tx
            .runAsync("MATCH (f:Fruit) WHERE id(f) = $id DELETE f", Values.parameters("id", id))
            .thenCompose(fn -> fn.consumeAsync()) // <1>
        )
        .thenCompose(response -> session.closeAsync())
        .thenApply(signal -> Response.noContent().build());
}
----
<1> There is no result for us, only a summary of the query executed.

A request may look like this

[source,bash]
----
curl -X DELETE localhost:8080/fruits/42
----

And that's already the most simple CRUD application with one type of nodes.
Feel free to add relationships to the model.
One idea would be to model recipes that contain fruits.
The Cypher manual linked in the introduction will help you with modelling your queries.

== Next steps

=== Packaging

Packaging your application is as simple as `./mvnw clean package`.
It can be run with `java -jar target/quarkus-app/quarkus-run.jar`.

With GraalVM installed, you can also create a native executable binary: `./mvnw clean package -Dnative`.
Depending on your system, that will take some time.

=== Connection Health Check

If you are using the `quarkus-smallrye-health` extension, `quarkus-neo4j` will automatically add a readiness health check
to validate the connection to Neo4j.

So when you access the `/q/health/ready` endpoint of your application you will have information about the connection validation status.

This behavior can be disabled by setting the `quarkus.neo4j.health.enabled` property to `false` in your `application.properties`.

=== Driver metrics

If you are using a metrics extension and specify the config property `quarkus.neo4j.pool.metrics.enabled=true`, the Neo4j extension will
expose several metrics related to the Neo4j connection pool.

=== Explore Cypher and the Graph

There are tons of options to model your domain within a Graph.
The https://neo4j.com/docs/[Neo4j docs], the sandboxes and more are a good starting point.

[[reactive]]
=== Going reactive

If you have access to Neo4j 4.0, you can go fully reactive.

To make life a bit easier, we will use https://smallrye.io/smallrye-mutiny/[Mutiny] for this.

[TIP]
.Mutiny
====
The following example uses Mutiny reactive types.
If you are not familiar with Mutiny, check xref:mutiny-primer.adoc[Mutiny - an intuitive reactive programming library].
====

Add the following dependency to your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-resteasy-mutiny</artifactId>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
----

The reactive fruit resources streams the name of all fruits:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/org/acme/neo4j/ReactiveFruitResource.java
----
package org.acme.neo4j;

import javax.inject.Inject;
import javax.ws.rs.Consumes;
import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

import io.smallrye.mutiny.Multi;
import io.smallrye.mutiny.Uni;
import org.neo4j.driver.Driver;
import org.neo4j.driver.reactive.RxResult;
import org.reactivestreams.Publisher;


@Path("reactivefruits")
@Produces(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
@Consumes(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
public class ReactiveFruitResource {

    @Inject
    Driver driver;

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.SERVER_SENT_EVENTS)
    public Publisher<String> get() {
        // Create a stream from a resource we can close in a finalizer:
        return Multi.createFrom().resource(driver::rxSession,
                session -> session.readTransaction(tx -> {
                    RxResult result = tx.run("MATCH (f:Fruit) RETURN f.name as name ORDER BY f.name");
                    return Multi.createFrom().publisher(result.records())
                            .map(record -> record.get("name").asString());
                })
        ).withFinalizer(session -> {
            return Uni.createFrom().publisher(session.close());
        });
    }
}
----

`driver.rxSession()` returns a reactive session.
It exposes its API based on http://www.reactive-streams.org[Reactive Streams], most prominently, as `org.reactivestreams.Publisher`.
Those can be used directly, but we found it easier and more expressive to wrap them in reactive types such as the one provided by Mutiny.
Typically, in the previous code, the session is closed when the stream completes, fails or the subscriber cancels.

== Configuration Reference

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-neo4j.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

Commit message:

Improve handling of advanced Neo4j url schemes
This adds dedicated support of Neo4j `neo4j+s` and `neo4j+ssc` URL schemes by skipping all other configuration of encryption settings as the underlying driver prevents configuration of encryption settings via url schema and explicit settings at the same time.

Also adds a bit of documentation.

This fixes #19412.

Co-authored-by: Guillaume Smet <guillaume.smet@gmail.com>

docs/src/main/asciidoc/neo4j.adoc, after:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Neo4j
:neo4j_version: 4.3

include::./attributes.adoc[]
:extension-status: preview

https://neo4j.com[Neo4j] is a graph database management system developed by Neo4j, Inc. Neo4j is a native graph database focused not only on the data itself, but especially on the relations between data.
Neo4j stores data as a property graph, which consists of vertices or nodes as we call them, connected with edges or relationships.
Both of them can have properties.

Neo4j offers Cypher, a declarative query language much like SQL.
Cypher is used to for both querying the graph and creating or updating nodes and relationships.
As a declarative language it used to tell the database what to do and not how to do it.

NOTE: Learn more about Cypher in the https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/[Neo4j Cypher manual].
      Cypher is not only available in Neo4j, but for example coming to https://github.com/opencypher/morpheus[Apache Spark].
      A spec called http://www.opencypher.org[OpenCypher] is available, too.

Clients communicate over the so called Bolt protocol with the database.

Neo4j - as the most popular graph database according to DB-Engines ranking - provides a variety of drivers for various languages.

The Quarkus Neo4j extension is based on the official https://github.com/neo4j/neo4j-java-driver[Neo4j Java Driver].
The extension provides an instance of the driver configured ready for usage in any Quarkus application.
You will be able to issue arbitrary Cypher statements over Bolt with this extension.
Those statements can be simple CRUD statements as well as complex queries, calling graph algorithms and more.

The driver itself is released under the Apache 2.0 license,
while Neo4j itself is available in a GPL3-licensed open-source "community edition",
with online backup and high availability extensions licensed under a closed-source commercial license.

include::./status-include.adoc[]

== Programming model

The driver and thus the Quarkus extension support three different programming models:

* Blocking database access (much like standard JDBC)
* Asynchronous programming based on JDK's completable futures and related infrastructure
* Reactive programming based on http://www.reactive-streams.org[Reactive Streams]

The reactive programming model is only available when connected against a 4.0+ version of Neo4j.
Reactive programming in Neo4j is fully end-to-end reactive and therefore requires a server that supports backpressure.

In this guide you will learn how to

* Add the Neo4j extension to your project
* Configure the driver
* And how to use the driver to access a Neo4j database

This guide will focus on asynchronous access to Neo4j, as this is ready to use for everyone.
At the end of this guide, there will be a reactive version, which needs however a 4.0 database version.

== The domain

As with some of the other guides, the application shall manage fruit entities.

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.neo4j;

public class Fruit {

    public Long id;

    public String name;

    public Fruit() {
        // This is needed for the REST-Easy JSON Binding
    }

    public Fruit(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

    public Fruit(Long id, String name) {
        this.id = id;
        this.name = name;
    }
}
----

== Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need:

* JDK 11+ installed with `JAVA_HOME` configured appropriately
* an IDE
* Apache Maven {maven-version}
* Access to a Neo4j Database
* Optional Docker for your system

=== Setup Neo4j

The easiest way to start a Neo4j instance is a locally installed Docker environment.

[source,bash,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
docker run --publish=7474:7474 --publish=7687:7687 -e 'NEO4J_AUTH=neo4j/secret' neo4j:{neo4j_version}
----

This starts a Neo4j instance, that publishes its Bolt port on `7687` and a web interface on http://localhost:7474.

Have a look at the https://neo4j.com/download/?ref=product[download page] for other options to get started with the product itself.

== Solution

We recommend that you follow the instructions in the next sections and create the application step by step.
However, you can go right to the completed example.

Clone the Git repository: git clone https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts.git, or download an archive.

The solution is located in the `neo4j-quickstart` {quickstarts-tree-url}/neo4j-quickstart[directory].
It contains a very simple UI to use the JAX-RS resources created here, too.

== Creating the Maven project

First, we need a new project. Create a new project with the following command:

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn io.quarkus.platform:quarkus-maven-plugin:{quarkus-version}:create \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
    -DprojectArtifactId=neo4j-quickstart \
    -DclassName="org.acme.datasource.GreetingResource" \
    -Dextensions="resteasy,neo4j,resteasy-jackson"
cd neo4j-quickstart
----

It generates:

* the Maven structure
* a landing page accessible on `http://localhost:8080`
* example `Dockerfile` files for both `native` and `jvm` modes
* the application configuration file
* an `org.acme.datasource.GreetingResource` resource
* an associated test

The Neo4j extension has been added already to your `pom.xml`.
In addition, we added `resteasy-jackson`, which allows us to expose `Fruit` instances over HTTP in the JSON format via JAX-RS resources.
If you have an already created project, the `neo4j` extension can be added to an existing Quarkus project with the `add-extension` command:

[source,bash]
----
./mvnw quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="neo4j"
----

Otherwise, you can manually add this to the dependencies section of your `pom.xml` file:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-neo4j</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

== Configuring

The Neo4j driver can be configured with standard Quarkus properties:

[source,properties]
.src/main/resources/application.properties
----
# Those are the default values and are implicitly assumed
quarkus.neo4j.uri = bolt://localhost:7687
quarkus.neo4j.authentication.username = neo4j
quarkus.neo4j.authentication.password = secret
----

You'll recognize the authentication here that you passed on to the docker command above.

Having done that, the driver is ready to use, there are however other configuration options, detailed below.

[[dev-services]]
=== Dev Services (Configuration Free Databases)

Quarkus supports a feature called Dev Services that allows you to create various datasources without any config.
In the case of Neo4j this support applies to the single Neo4j driver instance.
Dev Services will bring up a Neo4j container if you didn't explicit add the default values or configured custom values for
any of `quarkus.neo4j.uri`, `quarkus.neo4j.authentication.username` or `quarkus.neo4j.authentication.password`.
If Neo4j seems to be reachable via the default properties, Dev Services will also step back.

Otherwise, Quarkus will automatically start a Neo4j container when running tests or dev-mode,
and automatically configure the connection.

When running the production version of the application, the Neo4j connection need to be configured as normal,
so if you want to include a production database config in your `application.properties` and continue to use Dev Services
we recommend that you use the `%prod.` profile to define your Neo4j settings.

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-neo4j-config-group-dev-services-build-time-config.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

== Using the driver

=== General remarks

The result of a statement consists usually of one or more `org.neo4j.driver.Record`.
Those records contain arbitrary values, supported by the driver.
If you return a node of the graph, it will be a `org.neo4j.driver.types.Node`.

We add the following method to the `Fruit`, as a convenient way to create them:

[source,java]
----
public static Fruit from(Node node) {
    return new Fruit(node.id(), node.get("name").asString());
}
----

Add a `FruitResource` skeleton like this and `@Inject` a `org.neo4j.driver.Driver` instance:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/org/acme/neo4j/FruitResource.java
----
package org.acme.neo4j;

import javax.inject.Inject;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;

import org.neo4j.driver.Driver;

@Path("fruits")
public class FruitResource {

    @Inject
    Driver driver;
}
----

=== Reading nodes

Add the following method to the fruit resource:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/org/acme/neo4j/FruitResource.java
----
@GET
public CompletionStage<Response> get() {
    AsyncSession session = driver.asyncSession(); // <1>
    return session
        .runAsync("MATCH (f:Fruit) RETURN f ORDER BY f.name")  // <2>
        .thenCompose(cursor ->  // <3>
            cursor.listAsync(record -> Fruit.from(record.get("f").asNode()))
        )
        .thenCompose(fruits ->  // <4>
            session.closeAsync().thenApply(signal -> fruits)
        )
        .thenApply(Response::ok) // <5>
        .thenApply(ResponseBuilder::build);
}
----
<1> Open a new, asynchronous session with Neo4j
<2> Execute a query. This is a Cypher statement.
<3> Retrieve a cursor, list the results and create ``Fruit``s.
<4> Close the session after processing
<5> Create a JAX-RS response

Now start Quarkus in `dev` mode with:

[source,bash]
----
./mvnw compile quarkus:dev
----

and retrieve the endpoint like this

[source,bash]
----
curl localhost:8080/fruits
----

There are not any fruits, so let's create some.

=== Creating nodes

The `POST` method looks similar.
It uses transaction functions of the driver:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/org/acme/neo4j/FruitResource.java
----
@POST
public CompletionStage<Response> create(Fruit fruit) {
    AsyncSession session = driver.asyncSession();
    return session
        .writeTransactionAsync(tx -> tx
            .runAsync("CREATE (f:Fruit {name: $name}) RETURN f", Values.parameters("name", fruit.name))
            .thenCompose(fn -> fn.singleAsync())
        )
        .thenApply(record -> Fruit.from(record.get("f").asNode()))
        .thenCompose(persistedFruit -> session.closeAsync().thenApply(signal -> persistedFruit))
        .thenApply(persistedFruit -> Response
            .created(URI.create("/fruits/" + persistedFruit.id))
            .build()
        );
}
----

As you can see, we are now using a Cypher statement with named parameters (The `$name` of the fruit).
The node is returned, a `Fruit` entity created and then mapped to a `201` created response.

A curl request against this path may look like this:

[source,bash]
----
curl -v -X "POST" "http://localhost:8080/fruits" \
     -H 'Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8' \
     -d $'{
  "name": "Banana"
}'
----

The response contains an URI that shall return single nodes.

=== Read single nodes

This time, we ask for a read-only transaction.
We also add some exception handling, in case the resource is called with an invalid id:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/org/acme/neo4j/FruitResource.java
----
@GET
@Path("{id}")
public CompletionStage<Response> getSingle(@PathParam("id") Long id) {
    AsyncSession session = driver.asyncSession();
    return session
        .readTransactionAsync(tx -> tx
            .runAsync("MATCH (f:Fruit) WHERE id(f) = $id RETURN f", Values.parameters("id", id))
            .thenCompose(fn -> fn.singleAsync())
    )
    .handle((record, exception) -> {
        if(exception != null) {
            Throwable source = exception;
            if(exception instanceof CompletionException) {
                source = ((CompletionException)exception).getCause();
            }
            Status status = Status.INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR;
            if(source instanceof NoSuchRecordException) {
                status = Status.NOT_FOUND;
            }
            return Response.status(status).build();
        } else  {
            return Response.ok(Fruit.from(record.get("f").asNode())).build();
        }
    })
    .thenCompose(response -> session.closeAsync().thenApply(signal -> response));
}
----

A request may look like this:

[source,bash]
----
curl localhost:8080/fruits/42
----

NOTE: In case Neo4j has been setup as a cluster, the transaction mode is used to decide whether a request is routed
      to a leader or a follower instance. Write transactions must be handled by a leader, whereas read-only transactions
      can be handled by followers.

=== Deleting nodes

Finally, we want to get rid of fruits again and we add the `DELETE` method:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/org/acme/neo4j/FruitResource.java
----
@DELETE
@Path("{id}")
public CompletionStage<Response> delete(@PathParam("id") Long id) {

    AsyncSession session = driver.asyncSession();
    return session
        .writeTransactionAsync(tx -> tx
            .runAsync("MATCH (f:Fruit) WHERE id(f) = $id DELETE f", Values.parameters("id", id))
            .thenCompose(fn -> fn.consumeAsync()) // <1>
        )
        .thenCompose(response -> session.closeAsync())
        .thenApply(signal -> Response.noContent().build());
}
----
<1> There is no result for us, only a summary of the query executed.

A request may look like this

[source,bash]
----
curl -X DELETE localhost:8080/fruits/42
----

And that's already the most simple CRUD application with one type of nodes.
Feel free to add relationships to the model.
One idea would be to model recipes that contain fruits.
The Cypher manual linked in the introduction will help you with modelling your queries.

== Next steps

=== Packaging

Packaging your application is as simple as `./mvnw clean package`.
It can be run with `java -jar target/quarkus-app/quarkus-run.jar`.

With GraalVM installed, you can also create a native executable binary: `./mvnw clean package -Dnative`.
Depending on your system, that will take some time.

=== Connection Health Check

If you are using the `quarkus-smallrye-health` extension, `quarkus-neo4j` will automatically add a readiness health check
to validate the connection to Neo4j.

So when you access the `/q/health/ready` endpoint of your application you will have information about the connection validation status.

This behavior can be disabled by setting the `quarkus.neo4j.health.enabled` property to `false` in your `application.properties`.

=== Driver metrics

If you are using a metrics extension and specify the config property `quarkus.neo4j.pool.metrics.enabled=true`, the Neo4j extension will
expose several metrics related to the Neo4j connection pool.

=== Explore Cypher and the Graph

There are tons of options to model your domain within a Graph.
The https://neo4j.com/docs/[Neo4j docs], the sandboxes and more are a good starting point.

[[reactive]]
=== Going reactive

If you have access to Neo4j 4.0, you can go fully reactive.

To make life a bit easier, we will use https://smallrye.io/smallrye-mutiny/[Mutiny] for this.

[TIP]
.Mutiny
====
The following example uses Mutiny reactive types.
If you are not familiar with Mutiny, check xref:mutiny-primer.adoc[Mutiny - an intuitive reactive programming library].
====

Add the following dependency to your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-resteasy-mutiny</artifactId>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
----

The reactive fruit resources streams the name of all fruits:

[source,java]
.src/main/java/org/acme/neo4j/ReactiveFruitResource.java
----
package org.acme.neo4j;

import javax.inject.Inject;
import javax.ws.rs.Consumes;
import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

import io.smallrye.mutiny.Multi;
import io.smallrye.mutiny.Uni;
import org.neo4j.driver.Driver;
import org.neo4j.driver.reactive.RxResult;
import org.reactivestreams.Publisher;


@Path("reactivefruits")
@Produces(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
@Consumes(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
public class ReactiveFruitResource {

    @Inject
    Driver driver;

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.SERVER_SENT_EVENTS)
    public Publisher<String> get() {
        // Create a stream from a resource we can close in a finalizer:
        return Multi.createFrom().resource(driver::rxSession,
                session -> session.readTransaction(tx -> {
                    RxResult result = tx.run("MATCH (f:Fruit) RETURN f.name as name ORDER BY f.name");
                    return Multi.createFrom().publisher(result.records())
                            .map(record -> record.get("name").asString());
                })
        ).withFinalizer(session -> {
            return Uni.createFrom().publisher(session.close());
        });
    }
}
----

`driver.rxSession()` returns a reactive session.
It exposes its API based on http://www.reactive-streams.org[Reactive Streams], most prominently, as `org.reactivestreams.Publisher`.
Those can be used directly, but we found it easier and more expressive to wrap them in reactive types such as the one provided by Mutiny.
Typically, in the previous code, the session is closed when the stream completes, fails or the subscriber cancels.

== Configuration Reference

NOTE: Each of the neo4j and bolt URI schemes permit variants that contain extra encryption and trust information.
      The +s variants enable encryption with a full certificate check, and the +ssc variants enable encryption,
      but with no certificate check. This latter variant is designed specifically for use with self-signed certificates.
      The variants are basically shortcuts over explicit configuration. If you use one of them, Quarkus won't pass
      `quarkus.neo4j.encrypted` and related to the driver creation as the driver prohibits this.
      +
      The only check applied when Quarkus detects a secure url (either of `+s` or `+ssc`) is to ensure availability of
      SSL in native image and will throw `ConfigurationException` if it isn't available.

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-neo4j.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]
