docs/src/main/asciidoc/picocli.adoc, before:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Command Mode with Picocli
:extension-status: experimental

include::./attributes.adoc[]

https://picocli.info/[Picocli] is an open source tool for creating rich command line applications.

Quarkus provides support for using Picocli. This guide contains examples of `picocli` extension usage.

include::./status-include.adoc[]

IMPORTANT: If you are not familiar with the Quarkus Command Mode, consider reading the link:command-mode-reference[Command Mode reference guide] first.

== Configuration

Once you have your Quarkus project configured you can add the `picocli` extension
to your project by running the following command in your project base directory.

[source,bash]
----
./mvnw quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="picocli"
----

This will add the following to your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-picocli</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

== Simple command line application

Simple PicocliApplication with only one `Command` can be created as follows:

[source,java]
----
package com.acme.picocli;

import picocli.CommandLine;

import javax.enterprise.context.Dependent;
import javax.inject.Inject;

@CommandLine.Command // <1>
public class HelloCommand implements Runnable {

    @CommandLine.Option(names = {"-n", "--name"}, description = "Who will we greet?", defaultValue = "World")
    String name;

    private final GreetingService greetingService;

    public HelloCommand(GreetingService greetingService) { // <2>
        this.greetingService = greetingService;
    }

    @Override
    public void run() {
        greetingService.sayHello(name);
    }
}

@Dependent
class GreetingService {
    void sayHello(String name) {
        System.out.println("Hello " + name + "!");
    }
}
----
<1> If there is only one class annotated with `picocli.CommandLine.Command` it will be used as entry point to Picocli CommandLine.
<2> All classes annotated with `picocli.CommandLine.Command` are registered as CDI beans.

IMPORTANT: Beans with `@CommandLine.Command` should not use proxied scopes (e.g. do not use `@ApplicationScope`)
because Picocli will not be able set field values in such beans. This extension will register classes with `@CommandLine.Command` annotation
using `@Depended` scope. If you need to use proxied scope, then annotate setter and not field, for example:
[source,java]
----
@CommandLine.Command
@ApplicationScoped
public class EntryCommand {
    private String name;

    @CommandLine.Option(names = "-n")
    public void setName(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

}
----

== Command line application with multiple Commands

When multiple classes have the `picocli.CommandLine.Command` annotation, then one of them needs to be also annotated with `io.quarkus.picocli.runtime.annotations.TopCommand`.
This can be overwritten with the `quarkus.picocli.top-command` property.

[source,java]
----
package com.acme.picocli;

import io.quarkus.picocli.runtime.annotations.TopCommand;
import picocli.CommandLine;

@TopCommand
@CommandLine.Command(mixinStandardHelpOptions = true, subcommands = {HelloCommand.class, GoodByeCommand.class})
public class EntryCommand {
}

@CommandLine.Command(name = "hello", description = "Greet World!")
class HelloCommand implements Runnable {

    @Override
    public void run() {
        System.out.println("Hello World!");
    }
}

@CommandLine.Command(name = "goodbye", description = "Say goodbye to World!")
class GoodByeCommand implements Runnable {

    @Override
    public void run() {
        System.out.println("Goodbye World!");
    }
}
----

== Customizing Picocli CommandLine instance

You can customize CommandLine classes used by the `picocli` extension by producing your own bean instance:

[source,java]
----
package com.acme.picocli;

import io.quarkus.picocli.runtime.PicocliCommandLineFactory;
import io.quarkus.picocli.runtime.annotations.TopCommand;
import picocli.CommandLine;

import javax.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;
import javax.enterprise.inject.Produces;

@TopCommand
@CommandLine.Command
public class EntryCommand implements Runnable {
    @CommandLine.Spec
    CommandLine.Model.CommandSpec spec;

    @Override
    public void run() {
        System.out.println("My name is: " + spec.name());
    }
}

@ApplicationScoped
class CustomConfiguration {

    @Produces
    CommandLine customCommandLine(PicocliCommandLineFactory factory) { // <1>
        return factory.create().setCommandName("CustomizedName");
    }
}
----
<1> `PicocliCommandLineFactory` will create an instance of CommandLine with `TopCommand` and `CommandLine.IFactory` injected.

== Different entry command for each profile

It is possible to create different entry command for each profile, using `@IfBuildProfile`:

[source,java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class Config {

    @Produces
    @TopCommand
    @IfBuildProfile("dev")
    public Object devCommand() {
        return DevCommand.class; // <1>
    }

    @Produces
    @TopCommand
    @IfBuildProfile("prod")
    public Object prodCommand() {
        return new ProdCommand("Configured by me!");
    }

}
----
<1> You can return instance of `java.lang.Class` here. In such case `CommandLine` will try to instantiate this class using `CommandLine.IFactory`.

== Configure CDI Beans with parsed arguments

You can use `Event<CommandLine.ParseResult>` or just `CommandLine.ParseResult` to configure CDI beans based on arguments parsed by Picocli.
This event will be generated in `QuarkusApplication` class created by this extension. If you are providing your own `@QuarkusMain` this event will not be raised.
`CommandLine.ParseResult` is created from default `CommandLine` bean.

[source,java]
----
@CommandLine.Command
public class EntryCommand implements Runnable {
    
    @CommandLine.Option(names = "-c", description = "JDBC connection string")
    String connectionString;

    @Inject
    DataSource dataSource;

    @Override
    public void run() {
        try (Connection c = dataSource.getConnection()) {
            // Do something
        } catch (SQLException throwables) {
            // Handle error
        }
    }
}

@ApplicationScoped
class DatasourceConfiguration {

    @Produces
    @ApplicationScoped // <1>
    DataSource dataSource(CommandLine.ParseResult parseResult) {
        PGSimpleDataSource ds = new PGSimpleDataSource();
        ds.setURL(parseResult.matchedOption("c").getValue().toString());
        return ds;
    }
}
----
<1> `@ApplicationScoped` used for lazy initialization

== Providing own QuarkusMain

You can also provide your own application entry point annotated with `QuarkusMain` (as described in link:command-mode-reference[Command Mode reference guide]).

[source,java]
----
package com.acme.picocli;

import io.quarkus.runtime.QuarkusApplication;
import io.quarkus.runtime.annotations.QuarkusMain;
import picocli.CommandLine;

import javax.inject.Inject;

@QuarkusMain
@CommandLine.Command(name = "demo", mixinStandardHelpOptions = true)
public class ExampleApp implements Runnable, QuarkusApplication {
    @Inject
    CommandLine.IFactory factory; // <1>

    @Override
    public void run() {
        // business logic
    }

    @Override
    public int run(String... args) throws Exception {
        return new CommandLine(this, factory).execute(args);
    }
}
----
<1> Quarkus-compatible `CommandLine.IFactory` bean created by `picocli` extension.

== Native mode support

This extension uses the Quarkus standard build steps mechanism to support GraalVM Native images. In the exceptional case that incompatible changes in a future picocli release cause any issue, the following configuration can be used to fall back to the annotation processor from the picocli project as a temporary workaround:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>info.picocli</groupId>
  <artifactId>picocli-codegen</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

For Gradle, you need to add the following in `dependencies` section of the `build.gradle` file:

[source,groovy,subs=attributes+]
----
annotationProcessor enforcedPlatform("${quarkusPlatformGroupId}:${quarkusPlatformArtifactId}:${quarkusPlatformVersion}")
annotationProcessor 'info.picocli:picocli-codegen'
----

== Configuration Reference

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-picocli.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

Commit message:

Command mode apps - fix the restart key in the docs
- also mention the dev mode in the picocli guide

docs/src/main/asciidoc/picocli.adoc, after:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Command Mode with Picocli
:extension-status: experimental

include::./attributes.adoc[]

https://picocli.info/[Picocli] is an open source tool for creating rich command line applications.

Quarkus provides support for using Picocli. This guide contains examples of `picocli` extension usage.

include::./status-include.adoc[]

IMPORTANT: If you are not familiar with the Quarkus Command Mode, consider reading the link:command-mode-reference[Command Mode reference guide] first.

== Configuration

Once you have your Quarkus project configured you can add the `picocli` extension
to your project by running the following command in your project base directory.

[source,bash]
----
./mvnw quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="picocli"
----

This will add the following to your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-picocli</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

== Simple command line application

Simple PicocliApplication with only one `Command` can be created as follows:

[source,java]
----
package com.acme.picocli;

import picocli.CommandLine;

import javax.enterprise.context.Dependent;
import javax.inject.Inject;

@CommandLine.Command // <1>
public class HelloCommand implements Runnable {

    @CommandLine.Option(names = {"-n", "--name"}, description = "Who will we greet?", defaultValue = "World")
    String name;

    private final GreetingService greetingService;

    public HelloCommand(GreetingService greetingService) { // <2>
        this.greetingService = greetingService;
    }

    @Override
    public void run() {
        greetingService.sayHello(name);
    }
}

@Dependent
class GreetingService {
    void sayHello(String name) {
        System.out.println("Hello " + name + "!");
    }
}
----
<1> If there is only one class annotated with `picocli.CommandLine.Command` it will be used as entry point to Picocli CommandLine.
<2> All classes annotated with `picocli.CommandLine.Command` are registered as CDI beans.

IMPORTANT: Beans with `@CommandLine.Command` should not use proxied scopes (e.g. do not use `@ApplicationScope`)
because Picocli will not be able set field values in such beans. This extension will register classes with `@CommandLine.Command` annotation
using `@Depended` scope. If you need to use proxied scope, then annotate setter and not field, for example:
[source,java]
----
@CommandLine.Command
@ApplicationScoped
public class EntryCommand {
    private String name;

    @CommandLine.Option(names = "-n")
    public void setName(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

}
----

== Command line application with multiple Commands

When multiple classes have the `picocli.CommandLine.Command` annotation, then one of them needs to be also annotated with `io.quarkus.picocli.runtime.annotations.TopCommand`.
This can be overwritten with the `quarkus.picocli.top-command` property.

[source,java]
----
package com.acme.picocli;

import io.quarkus.picocli.runtime.annotations.TopCommand;
import picocli.CommandLine;

@TopCommand
@CommandLine.Command(mixinStandardHelpOptions = true, subcommands = {HelloCommand.class, GoodByeCommand.class})
public class EntryCommand {
}

@CommandLine.Command(name = "hello", description = "Greet World!")
class HelloCommand implements Runnable {

    @Override
    public void run() {
        System.out.println("Hello World!");
    }
}

@CommandLine.Command(name = "goodbye", description = "Say goodbye to World!")
class GoodByeCommand implements Runnable {

    @Override
    public void run() {
        System.out.println("Goodbye World!");
    }
}
----

== Customizing Picocli CommandLine instance

You can customize CommandLine classes used by the `picocli` extension by producing your own bean instance:

[source,java]
----
package com.acme.picocli;

import io.quarkus.picocli.runtime.PicocliCommandLineFactory;
import io.quarkus.picocli.runtime.annotations.TopCommand;
import picocli.CommandLine;

import javax.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;
import javax.enterprise.inject.Produces;

@TopCommand
@CommandLine.Command
public class EntryCommand implements Runnable {
    @CommandLine.Spec
    CommandLine.Model.CommandSpec spec;

    @Override
    public void run() {
        System.out.println("My name is: " + spec.name());
    }
}

@ApplicationScoped
class CustomConfiguration {

    @Produces
    CommandLine customCommandLine(PicocliCommandLineFactory factory) { // <1>
        return factory.create().setCommandName("CustomizedName");
    }
}
----
<1> `PicocliCommandLineFactory` will create an instance of CommandLine with `TopCommand` and `CommandLine.IFactory` injected.

== Different entry command for each profile

It is possible to create different entry command for each profile, using `@IfBuildProfile`:

[source,java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class Config {

    @Produces
    @TopCommand
    @IfBuildProfile("dev")
    public Object devCommand() {
        return DevCommand.class; // <1>
    }

    @Produces
    @TopCommand
    @IfBuildProfile("prod")
    public Object prodCommand() {
        return new ProdCommand("Configured by me!");
    }

}
----
<1> You can return instance of `java.lang.Class` here. In such case `CommandLine` will try to instantiate this class using `CommandLine.IFactory`.

== Configure CDI Beans with parsed arguments

You can use `Event<CommandLine.ParseResult>` or just `CommandLine.ParseResult` to configure CDI beans based on arguments parsed by Picocli.
This event will be generated in `QuarkusApplication` class created by this extension. If you are providing your own `@QuarkusMain` this event will not be raised.
`CommandLine.ParseResult` is created from default `CommandLine` bean.

[source,java]
----
@CommandLine.Command
public class EntryCommand implements Runnable {
    
    @CommandLine.Option(names = "-c", description = "JDBC connection string")
    String connectionString;

    @Inject
    DataSource dataSource;

    @Override
    public void run() {
        try (Connection c = dataSource.getConnection()) {
            // Do something
        } catch (SQLException throwables) {
            // Handle error
        }
    }
}

@ApplicationScoped
class DatasourceConfiguration {

    @Produces
    @ApplicationScoped // <1>
    DataSource dataSource(CommandLine.ParseResult parseResult) {
        PGSimpleDataSource ds = new PGSimpleDataSource();
        ds.setURL(parseResult.matchedOption("c").getValue().toString());
        return ds;
    }
}
----
<1> `@ApplicationScoped` used for lazy initialization

== Providing own QuarkusMain

You can also provide your own application entry point annotated with `QuarkusMain` (as described in link:command-mode-reference[Command Mode reference guide]).

[source,java]
----
package com.acme.picocli;

import io.quarkus.runtime.QuarkusApplication;
import io.quarkus.runtime.annotations.QuarkusMain;
import picocli.CommandLine;

import javax.inject.Inject;

@QuarkusMain
@CommandLine.Command(name = "demo", mixinStandardHelpOptions = true)
public class ExampleApp implements Runnable, QuarkusApplication {
    @Inject
    CommandLine.IFactory factory; // <1>

    @Override
    public void run() {
        // business logic
    }

    @Override
    public int run(String... args) throws Exception {
        return new CommandLine(this, factory).execute(args);
    }
}
----
<1> Quarkus-compatible `CommandLine.IFactory` bean created by `picocli` extension.

== Native mode support

This extension uses the Quarkus standard build steps mechanism to support GraalVM Native images. In the exceptional case that incompatible changes in a future picocli release cause any issue, the following configuration can be used to fall back to the annotation processor from the picocli project as a temporary workaround:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>info.picocli</groupId>
  <artifactId>picocli-codegen</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

For Gradle, you need to add the following in `dependencies` section of the `build.gradle` file:

[source,groovy,subs=attributes+]
----
annotationProcessor enforcedPlatform("${quarkusPlatformGroupId}:${quarkusPlatformArtifactId}:${quarkusPlatformVersion}")
annotationProcessor 'info.picocli:picocli-codegen'
----

== Development Mode

In the development mode, i.e. when running `mvn quarkus:dev`, the application is executed and restarted every time the `Space bar` key is pressed. You can also pass arguments to your command line app via the `quarkus.args` system property, e.g. `mvn quarkus:dev -Dquarkus.args='--help'` and `mvn quarkus:dev -Dquarkus.args='-c -w --val 1'`.

== Configuration Reference

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-picocli.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]
