docs/src/main/asciidoc/scheduler-reference.adoc, before:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Scheduler Reference Guide

include::./attributes.adoc[]

:numbered:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4
:toc:

Modern applications often need to run specific tasks periodically.
There are two scheduler extensions in Quarkus.
The `quarkus-scheduler` extension brings the API and a lightweight in-memory scheduler implementation.
The `quarkus-quartz` extension implements the API from the `quarkus-scheduler` extension and contains a scheduler implementation based on the Quartz library.
You will only need `quarkus-quartz` for more advanced scheduling use cases, such as persistent tasks, clustering and programmatic scheduling of jobs.

NOTE: If you add the `quarkus-quartz` dependency to your project the lightweight scheduler implementation from the `quarkus-scheduler` extension is automatically disabled. 

== Scheduled Methods

If you annotate a method with `@io.quarkus.scheduler.Scheduled` it is automatically scheduled for invocation.
In fact, such a method must be a non-private non-static method of a CDI bean. 
As a consequence of being a method of a CDI bean a scheduled method can be annotated with interceptor bindings, such as `@javax.transaction.Transactional` and `@org.eclipse.microprofile.metrics.annotation.Counted`.

NOTE: If there is no CDI scope defined on the declaring class then `@Singleton` is used. 

Furthermore, the annotated method must return `void` and either declare no parameters or one parameter of type `io.quarkus.scheduler.ScheduledExecution`.

TIP: The annotation is repeatable so a single method could be scheduled multiple times.

=== Triggers

A trigger is defined either by the `@Scheduled#cron()` or by the `@Scheduled#every()` attributes.
If both are specified, the cron expression takes precedence.
If none is specified, the build fails with an `IllegalStateException`.

==== CRON

A CRON trigger is defined by a cron-like expression.
For example `"0 15 10 * * ?"` fires at 10:15am every day.

.CRON Trigger Example
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(cron = "0 15 10 * * ?")
void fireAt10AmEveryDay() { }
----

The syntax used in CRON expressions is controlled by the `quarkus.scheduler.cron-type` property.
The values can be `cron4j`, `quartz`, `unix` and `spring`.
`quartz` is used by default.

The `cron` attribute supports <<config-reference#property_expressions,Property Expressions>> including default values and nested
Property Expressions. (Note that "{property.path}" style expressions are still supported but don't offer the full functionality of Property Expressions.)


.CRON Config Property Example
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(cron = "${myMethod.cron.expr}")
void myMethod() { }
----

If you wish to disable a specific scheduled method, you can set its cron expression to `"off"` or `"disabled"`.

.application.properties
[source,properties]
----
myMethod.cron.expr=disabled
----

Property Expressions allow you to define a default value that is used, if the property is not configured.

.CRON Config Property Example with default `0 0 15 ? * MON *`
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(cron = "${myMethod.cron.expr:0 0 15 ? * MON *}")
void myMethod() { }
----

If the property `myMethod.cron.expr` is undefined or `null`, the default value (`0 0 15 ? * MON *`) will be used.

==== Intervals

An interval trigger defines a period between invocations.
The period expression is based on the ISO-8601 duration format `PnDTnHnMn.nS` and the value of `@Scheduled#every()` is parsed with `java.time.Duration#parse(CharSequence)`. 
However, if an expression starts with a digit then the `PT` prefix is added automatically.
So for example, `15m` can be used instead of `PT15M` and is parsed as "15 minutes".

.Interval Trigger Example
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(every = "15m")
void every15Mins() { }
----

The `every` attribute supports <<config-reference#property_expressions,Property Expressions>> including default values and nested
Property Expressions. (Note that `"{property.path}"` style expressions are still supported but don't offer the full functionality of Property Expressions.)

.Interval Config Property Example
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(every = "${myMethod.every.expr}")
void myMethod() { }
----

Intervals can be disabled by setting their value to `"off"` or `"disabled"`.
So for example a Property Expression with the default value `"off"` can be used to disable the trigger if its Config Property has not been set.

.Interval Config Property Example with a Default Value
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(every = "${myMethod.every.expr:off}")
void myMethod() { }
----


=== Identity

By default, a unique id is generated for each scheduled method.
This id is used in log messages and during debugging.
Sometimes a possibility to specify an explicit id may come in handy.

.Identity Example
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(identity = "myScheduledMethod")
void myMethod() { }
----

The `identity` attribute supports <<config-reference#property_expressions,Property Expressions>> including default values and nested
Property Expressions. (Note that `"{property.path}"` style expressions are still supported but don't offer the full functionality of Property Expressions.)

.Interval Config Property Example
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(identity = "${myMethod.identity.expr}")
void myMethod() { }
----

=== Delayed Execution

`@Scheduled` provides two ways to delay the time a trigger should start firing at.

`@Scheduled#delay()` and `@Scheduled#delayUnit()` form the initial delay together.

[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(every = "2s", delay = 2, delayUnit = TimeUnit.HOUR) <1>
void everyTwoSeconds() { }
----
<1> The trigger fires for the first time two hours after the application start.

NOTE: The final value is always rounded to full second.

`@Scheduled#delayed()` is a text alternative to the properties above.
The period expression is based on the ISO-8601 duration format `PnDTnHnMn.nS` and the value is parsed with `java.time.Duration#parse(CharSequence)`. 
However, if an expression starts with a digit, the `PT` prefix is added automatically.
So for example, `15s` can be used instead of `PT15S` and is parsed as "15 seconds".

[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(every = "2s", delayed = "2h")
void everyTwoSeconds() { }
----

NOTE: If `@Scheduled#delay()` is set to a value greater than zero the value of `@Scheduled#delayed()` is ignored.

The main advantage over `@Scheduled#delay()` is that the value is configurable.
The `delay` attribute supports <<config-reference#property_expressions,Property Expressions>> including default values and nested
Property Expressions. (Note that `"{property.path}"` style expressions are still supported but don't offer the full functionality of Property Expressions.)


[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(every = "2s", delayed = "${myMethod.delay.expr}") <1>
void everyTwoSeconds() { }
----
<1> The config property `myMethod.delay.expr` is used to set the delay.

[[concurrent_execution]]
=== Concurrent Execution

By default, a scheduled method can be executed concurrently.
Nevertheless, it is possible to specify the strategy to handle concurrent executions via `@Scheduled#concurrentExecution()`.

[source,java]
----
import static io.quarkus.scheduler.Scheduled.ConcurrentExecution.SKIP;

@Scheduled(every = "1s", concurrentExecution = SKIP) <1>
void nonConcurrent() {
  // we can be sure that this method is never executed concurrently
}
----
<1> Concurrent executions are skipped.

TIP: A CDI event of type `io.quarkus.scheduler.SkippedExecution` is fired when an execution of a scheduled method is skipped.

[[conditional_execution]]
=== Conditional Execution

You can define the logic to skip any execution of a scheduled method via `@Scheduled#skipExecutionIf()`.
The specified bean class must implement `io.quarkus.scheduler.Scheduled.SkipPredicate` and the execution is skipped if the result of the `test()` method is `true`.

[source,java]
----
class Jobs {
  
   @Scheduled(every = "1s", skipExecutionIf = MyPredicate.class) <1>
   void everySecond() {
     // do something every second...
   }
}

@Singleton <2>
class MyPredicate implements SkipPredicate {

   @Inject
   MyService service;

   boolean test(ScheduledExecution execution) {
       return !service.isStarted(); <3>
   }
}
----
<1> A bean instance of `MyPredicate.class` is used to evaluate whether an execution should be skipped. There must be exactly one bean that has the specified class in its set of bean types, otherwise the build fails.
<2> The scope of the bean must be active during execution.
<3> `Jobs.everySecond()` is skipped until `MyService.isStarted()` returns `true`.

Note that this is an equivalent of the following code:

[source,java]
----
class Jobs {

   @Inject
   MyService service;
  
   @Scheduled(every = "1s")
   void everySecond() {
     if (service.isStarted()) {
        // do something every second...
     }
   }
}
----

The main idea is to keep the the logic to skip the execution outside the scheduled business methods so that it can be reused and refactored easily.

TIP: A CDI event of type `io.quarkus.scheduler.SkippedExecution` is fired when an execution of a scheduled method is skipped.

== Scheduler

Quarkus provides a built-in bean of type `io.quarkus.scheduler.Scheduler` that can be injected and used to pause/resume the scheduler and individual scheduled methods identified by a specific `Scheduled#identity()`.

.Scheduler Injection Example
[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.scheduler.Scheduler;

class MyService {

   @Inject
   Scheduler scheduler;

   void ping() {
      scheduler.pause(); <1>
      scheduler.pause("myIdentity"); <2>
      if (scheduler.isRunning()) {
         throw new IllegalStateException("This should never happen!");
      }
      scheduler.resume("myIdentity"); <3>
      scheduler.resume(); <4>
   }
}
----
<1> Pause all triggers.
<2> Pause a specific scheduled method by its identity
<3> Resume a specific scheduled method by its identity
<4> Resume the scheduler.

== Programmatic Scheduling

If you need to schedule a job programmatically you'll need to add the link:quartz[Quartz extension] and use the Quartz API directly.

.Programmatic Scheduling with Quartz API
[source,java]
----
import org.quartz.Scheduler;

class MyJobs {

    void onStart(@Observes StartupEvent event, Scheduler quartz) throws SchedulerException {
        JobDetail job = JobBuilder.newJob(SomeJob.class)
                .withIdentity("myJob", "myGroup")
                .build();
        Trigger trigger = TriggerBuilder.newTrigger()
                .withIdentity("myTrigger", "myGroup")
                .startNow()
                .withSchedule(SimpleScheduleBuilder.simpleSchedule()
                        .withIntervalInSeconds(1)
                        .repeatForever())
                .build();
        quartz.scheduleJob(job, trigger);
    }
}
----

NOTE: By default, the scheduler is not started unless a `@Scheduled` business method is found. You may need to force the start of the scheduler for "pure" programmatic scheduling. See also <<quartz.adoc#quartz-configuration-reference,Quartz Configuration Reference>>.

== Scheduled Methods and Testing

It is often desirable to disable the scheduler when running the tests.
The scheduler can be disabled through the runtime config property `quarkus.scheduler.enabled`.
If set to `false` the scheduler is not started even though the application contains scheduled methods.
You can even disable the scheduler for particular <<getting-started-testing#testing_different_profiles,Test Profiles>>.

== Metrics

Some basic metrics are published out of the box if `quarkus.scheduler.metrics.enabled` is set to `true` and a metrics extension is present. 

If the link:micrometer[Micrometer extension] is present, then a `@io.micrometer.core.annotation.Timed` interceptor binding is added to all `@Scheduled` methods automatically (unless it's already present) and a `io.micrometer.core.instrument.Timer` with name `scheduled.methods` and a `io.micrometer.core.instrument.LongTaskTimer` with name `scheduled.methods.running` are registered. The fully qualified name of the declaring class and the name of a `@Scheduled` method are used as tags.

If the link:smallrye-metrics[SmallRye Metrics extension] is present, then a `@org.eclipse.microprofile.metrics.annotation.Timed`  interceptor binding is added to all `@Scheduled` methods automatically (unless it's already present) and a `org.eclipse.microprofile.metrics.Timer` is created for each `@Scheduled` method. The name consists of the fully qualified name of the declaring class and the name of a `@Scheduled` method. The timer has a tag `scheduled=true`.

== Configuration Reference

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-scheduler.adoc[leveloffset=+1, opts=optional]

Commit message:

Scheduler docs - clarify the "concurrent execution strategy"
- make it clear that it's not designed to work across the cluster
- resolves #15800

docs/src/main/asciidoc/scheduler-reference.adoc, after:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Scheduler Reference Guide

include::./attributes.adoc[]

:numbered:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4
:toc:

Modern applications often need to run specific tasks periodically.
There are two scheduler extensions in Quarkus.
The `quarkus-scheduler` extension brings the API and a lightweight in-memory scheduler implementation.
The `quarkus-quartz` extension implements the API from the `quarkus-scheduler` extension and contains a scheduler implementation based on the Quartz library.
You will only need `quarkus-quartz` for more advanced scheduling use cases, such as persistent tasks, clustering and programmatic scheduling of jobs.

NOTE: If you add the `quarkus-quartz` dependency to your project the lightweight scheduler implementation from the `quarkus-scheduler` extension is automatically disabled. 

== Scheduled Methods

If you annotate a method with `@io.quarkus.scheduler.Scheduled` it is automatically scheduled for invocation.
In fact, such a method must be a non-private non-static method of a CDI bean. 
As a consequence of being a method of a CDI bean a scheduled method can be annotated with interceptor bindings, such as `@javax.transaction.Transactional` and `@org.eclipse.microprofile.metrics.annotation.Counted`.

NOTE: If there is no CDI scope defined on the declaring class then `@Singleton` is used. 

Furthermore, the annotated method must return `void` and either declare no parameters or one parameter of type `io.quarkus.scheduler.ScheduledExecution`.

TIP: The annotation is repeatable so a single method could be scheduled multiple times.

=== Triggers

A trigger is defined either by the `@Scheduled#cron()` or by the `@Scheduled#every()` attributes.
If both are specified, the cron expression takes precedence.
If none is specified, the build fails with an `IllegalStateException`.

==== CRON

A CRON trigger is defined by a cron-like expression.
For example `"0 15 10 * * ?"` fires at 10:15am every day.

.CRON Trigger Example
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(cron = "0 15 10 * * ?")
void fireAt10AmEveryDay() { }
----

The syntax used in CRON expressions is controlled by the `quarkus.scheduler.cron-type` property.
The values can be `cron4j`, `quartz`, `unix` and `spring`.
`quartz` is used by default.

The `cron` attribute supports <<config-reference#property_expressions,Property Expressions>> including default values and nested
Property Expressions. (Note that "{property.path}" style expressions are still supported but don't offer the full functionality of Property Expressions.)


.CRON Config Property Example
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(cron = "${myMethod.cron.expr}")
void myMethod() { }
----

If you wish to disable a specific scheduled method, you can set its cron expression to `"off"` or `"disabled"`.

.application.properties
[source,properties]
----
myMethod.cron.expr=disabled
----

Property Expressions allow you to define a default value that is used, if the property is not configured.

.CRON Config Property Example with default `0 0 15 ? * MON *`
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(cron = "${myMethod.cron.expr:0 0 15 ? * MON *}")
void myMethod() { }
----

If the property `myMethod.cron.expr` is undefined or `null`, the default value (`0 0 15 ? * MON *`) will be used.

==== Intervals

An interval trigger defines a period between invocations.
The period expression is based on the ISO-8601 duration format `PnDTnHnMn.nS` and the value of `@Scheduled#every()` is parsed with `java.time.Duration#parse(CharSequence)`. 
However, if an expression starts with a digit then the `PT` prefix is added automatically.
So for example, `15m` can be used instead of `PT15M` and is parsed as "15 minutes".

.Interval Trigger Example
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(every = "15m")
void every15Mins() { }
----

The `every` attribute supports <<config-reference#property_expressions,Property Expressions>> including default values and nested
Property Expressions. (Note that `"{property.path}"` style expressions are still supported but don't offer the full functionality of Property Expressions.)

.Interval Config Property Example
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(every = "${myMethod.every.expr}")
void myMethod() { }
----

Intervals can be disabled by setting their value to `"off"` or `"disabled"`.
So for example a Property Expression with the default value `"off"` can be used to disable the trigger if its Config Property has not been set.

.Interval Config Property Example with a Default Value
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(every = "${myMethod.every.expr:off}")
void myMethod() { }
----


=== Identity

By default, a unique id is generated for each scheduled method.
This id is used in log messages and during debugging.
Sometimes a possibility to specify an explicit id may come in handy.

.Identity Example
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(identity = "myScheduledMethod")
void myMethod() { }
----

The `identity` attribute supports <<config-reference#property_expressions,Property Expressions>> including default values and nested
Property Expressions. (Note that `"{property.path}"` style expressions are still supported but don't offer the full functionality of Property Expressions.)

.Interval Config Property Example
[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(identity = "${myMethod.identity.expr}")
void myMethod() { }
----

=== Delayed Execution

`@Scheduled` provides two ways to delay the time a trigger should start firing at.

`@Scheduled#delay()` and `@Scheduled#delayUnit()` form the initial delay together.

[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(every = "2s", delay = 2, delayUnit = TimeUnit.HOUR) <1>
void everyTwoSeconds() { }
----
<1> The trigger fires for the first time two hours after the application start.

NOTE: The final value is always rounded to full second.

`@Scheduled#delayed()` is a text alternative to the properties above.
The period expression is based on the ISO-8601 duration format `PnDTnHnMn.nS` and the value is parsed with `java.time.Duration#parse(CharSequence)`. 
However, if an expression starts with a digit, the `PT` prefix is added automatically.
So for example, `15s` can be used instead of `PT15S` and is parsed as "15 seconds".

[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(every = "2s", delayed = "2h")
void everyTwoSeconds() { }
----

NOTE: If `@Scheduled#delay()` is set to a value greater than zero the value of `@Scheduled#delayed()` is ignored.

The main advantage over `@Scheduled#delay()` is that the value is configurable.
The `delay` attribute supports <<config-reference#property_expressions,Property Expressions>> including default values and nested
Property Expressions. (Note that `"{property.path}"` style expressions are still supported but don't offer the full functionality of Property Expressions.)


[source,java]
----
@Scheduled(every = "2s", delayed = "${myMethod.delay.expr}") <1>
void everyTwoSeconds() { }
----
<1> The config property `myMethod.delay.expr` is used to set the delay.

[[concurrent_execution]]
=== Concurrent Execution

By default, a scheduled method can be executed concurrently.
Nevertheless, it is possible to specify the strategy to handle concurrent executions via `@Scheduled#concurrentExecution()`.

[source,java]
----
import static io.quarkus.scheduler.Scheduled.ConcurrentExecution.SKIP;

@Scheduled(every = "1s", concurrentExecution = SKIP) <1>
void nonConcurrent() {
  // we can be sure that this method is never executed concurrently
}
----
<1> Concurrent executions are skipped.

TIP: A CDI event of type `io.quarkus.scheduler.SkippedExecution` is fired when an execution of a scheduled method is skipped.

NOTE: Note that only executions within the same application instance are considered. This feature is not intended to work across the cluster.

[[conditional_execution]]
=== Conditional Execution

You can define the logic to skip any execution of a scheduled method via `@Scheduled#skipExecutionIf()`.
The specified bean class must implement `io.quarkus.scheduler.Scheduled.SkipPredicate` and the execution is skipped if the result of the `test()` method is `true`.

[source,java]
----
class Jobs {
  
   @Scheduled(every = "1s", skipExecutionIf = MyPredicate.class) <1>
   void everySecond() {
     // do something every second...
   }
}

@Singleton <2>
class MyPredicate implements SkipPredicate {

   @Inject
   MyService service;

   boolean test(ScheduledExecution execution) {
       return !service.isStarted(); <3>
   }
}
----
<1> A bean instance of `MyPredicate.class` is used to evaluate whether an execution should be skipped. There must be exactly one bean that has the specified class in its set of bean types, otherwise the build fails.
<2> The scope of the bean must be active during execution.
<3> `Jobs.everySecond()` is skipped until `MyService.isStarted()` returns `true`.

Note that this is an equivalent of the following code:

[source,java]
----
class Jobs {

   @Inject
   MyService service;
  
   @Scheduled(every = "1s")
   void everySecond() {
     if (service.isStarted()) {
        // do something every second...
     }
   }
}
----

The main idea is to keep the the logic to skip the execution outside the scheduled business methods so that it can be reused and refactored easily.

TIP: A CDI event of type `io.quarkus.scheduler.SkippedExecution` is fired when an execution of a scheduled method is skipped.

== Scheduler

Quarkus provides a built-in bean of type `io.quarkus.scheduler.Scheduler` that can be injected and used to pause/resume the scheduler and individual scheduled methods identified by a specific `Scheduled#identity()`.

.Scheduler Injection Example
[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.scheduler.Scheduler;

class MyService {

   @Inject
   Scheduler scheduler;

   void ping() {
      scheduler.pause(); <1>
      scheduler.pause("myIdentity"); <2>
      if (scheduler.isRunning()) {
         throw new IllegalStateException("This should never happen!");
      }
      scheduler.resume("myIdentity"); <3>
      scheduler.resume(); <4>
   }
}
----
<1> Pause all triggers.
<2> Pause a specific scheduled method by its identity
<3> Resume a specific scheduled method by its identity
<4> Resume the scheduler.

== Programmatic Scheduling

If you need to schedule a job programmatically you'll need to add the link:quartz[Quartz extension] and use the Quartz API directly.

.Programmatic Scheduling with Quartz API
[source,java]
----
import org.quartz.Scheduler;

class MyJobs {

    void onStart(@Observes StartupEvent event, Scheduler quartz) throws SchedulerException {
        JobDetail job = JobBuilder.newJob(SomeJob.class)
                .withIdentity("myJob", "myGroup")
                .build();
        Trigger trigger = TriggerBuilder.newTrigger()
                .withIdentity("myTrigger", "myGroup")
                .startNow()
                .withSchedule(SimpleScheduleBuilder.simpleSchedule()
                        .withIntervalInSeconds(1)
                        .repeatForever())
                .build();
        quartz.scheduleJob(job, trigger);
    }
}
----

NOTE: By default, the scheduler is not started unless a `@Scheduled` business method is found. You may need to force the start of the scheduler for "pure" programmatic scheduling. See also <<quartz.adoc#quartz-configuration-reference,Quartz Configuration Reference>>.

== Scheduled Methods and Testing

It is often desirable to disable the scheduler when running the tests.
The scheduler can be disabled through the runtime config property `quarkus.scheduler.enabled`.
If set to `false` the scheduler is not started even though the application contains scheduled methods.
You can even disable the scheduler for particular <<getting-started-testing#testing_different_profiles,Test Profiles>>.

== Metrics

Some basic metrics are published out of the box if `quarkus.scheduler.metrics.enabled` is set to `true` and a metrics extension is present. 

If the link:micrometer[Micrometer extension] is present, then a `@io.micrometer.core.annotation.Timed` interceptor binding is added to all `@Scheduled` methods automatically (unless it's already present) and a `io.micrometer.core.instrument.Timer` with name `scheduled.methods` and a `io.micrometer.core.instrument.LongTaskTimer` with name `scheduled.methods.running` are registered. The fully qualified name of the declaring class and the name of a `@Scheduled` method are used as tags.

If the link:smallrye-metrics[SmallRye Metrics extension] is present, then a `@org.eclipse.microprofile.metrics.annotation.Timed`  interceptor binding is added to all `@Scheduled` methods automatically (unless it's already present) and a `org.eclipse.microprofile.metrics.Timer` is created for each `@Scheduled` method. The name consists of the fully qualified name of the declaring class and the name of a `@Scheduled` method. The timer has a tag `scheduled=true`.

== Configuration Reference

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-scheduler.adoc[leveloffset=+1, opts=optional]
