docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-openid-connect-dev-services.adoc, before:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Dev Services for OpenId Connect

include::./attributes.adoc[]

This guide covers the Dev Services for OpenId Connect Keycloak provider and explains how to support other OpenId Connect providers.

== Introduction

Quarkus introduces an experimental `Dev Services For Keycloak` feature which is enabled by default when the `quarkus-oidc` extension is started in dev mode. It starts a Keycloak container and initializes it by registering the existing Keycloak realm or creating a new realm with the client and users for you to start developing your Quarkus application secured by Keycloak immediately. It will restart a container when the `application.properties` or the realm file changes have been detected.

Additionally, link:dev-ui[Dev UI] available at http://localhost:8080/q/dev[/q/dev] supports this feature with a Keycloak specific page which helps to acquire the tokens from Keycloak and test your Quarkus application.

== Dev Services for Keycloak

Start your application without configuring `quarkus.oidc` properties in `application.properties`. You will see in the console something similar to:

[source,shell]
----
$ mvn quarkus:dev

2021-06-04 16:22:47,175 INFO  [🐳 .io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0]] (build-38) Creating container for image: quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0
2021-06-04 16:22:47,243 INFO  [🐳 .io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0]] (build-38) Starting container with ID: 6469f6db9cec2c855fcc6c8db4273944cc9d69e8f6803a0b47eb2d5b8f5b94fd
2021-06-04 16:22:47,629 INFO  [🐳 .io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0]] (build-38) Container quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0 is starting: 6469f6db9cec2c855fcc6c8db4273944cc9d69e8f6803a0b47eb2d5b8f5b94fd
2021-06-04 16:22:47,643 INFO  [org.tes.con.wai.str.HttpWaitStrategy] (build-38) /elastic_lovelace: Waiting for 60 seconds for URL: http://localhost:32812/auth (where port 32812 maps to container port 8080)
2021-06-04 16:23:07,665 INFO  [🐳 .io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0]] (build-38) Container quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0 started in PT5.500489S
...
2021-06-04 16:23:11,155 INFO  [io.quarkus] (Quarkus Main Thread) security-openid-connect-quickstart 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT on JVM (powered by Quarkus 999-SNAPSHOT) started in 25.968s. Listening on: http://localhost:8080
2021-06-04 16:23:11,157 INFO  [io.quarkus] (Quarkus Main Thread) Profile dev activated. Live Coding activated.
----

The `quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0` Keycloak image is used by default to start a container. `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.image-name` can be used to change the Keycloak image used.

Now open the main Dev UI page and you will see the `OpenId Connect Card` linking to a `Keycloak` page:

image::dev-ui-oidc-keycloak-card.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Card,role="center"]

Click on the `Provider: Keycloak` link and you will see a Keycloak page which will be presented slightly differently depending on how `Dev Services for Keycloak` feature has been configured.

=== Testing Service Applications

By default the Keycloak page can be used to support the development of a link:security-openid-connect[Quarkus OIDC service application].

==== Implicit Grant

If you set `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.grant.type=implicit` in `applicatin.properties` (this is a default value) then an `implicit` grant will be used to acquire both access and ID tokens.
Using this grant is recommended to emulate a typical flow where a `Singe Page Application` acquires the tokens and uses them to access Quarkus services.

First you will see an option to `Log into Single Page Application`:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-sign-in-to-spa.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Keycloak Page - Log into Single Page Application,role="center"].

Next, after you select this option, you will be redirected to Keycloak to authenticate, example, as `alice:alice` and then returned to the page representing the SPA:  

image::dev-ui-keycloak-test-service-from-spa.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Keycloak Single Page Application,role="center"].

Here you can test the service with either the access token or ID token (note that the ID token will be sent as a regular bearer token).

Finally you can click a `Logged in` option if you'd like to log out and authenticate to Keycloak as a different user.

==== Password Grant

If you set `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.grant.type=password` in `applicatin.properties` then you will see a screen like this one:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-password-grant.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Keycloak Page - Password Grant,role="center"]

Enter a registered user name, a relative service endpoint path, click on `Test Service` and you will see a status code such as `200`, `403`, `401` or `404` printed.

You will also see in the Dev UI console something similar to:

[source,shell]
----
2021-07-19 17:58:11,407 INFO  [io.qua.oid.dep.dev.key.KeycloakDevConsolePostHandler] (security-openid-connect-quickstart-dev.jar) (DEV Console action) Getting token from 'http://localhost:32818/auth/realms/quarkus/protocol/openid-connect/token' for user 'alice' in realm 'quarkus' using client id 'quarkus-app'
2021-07-19 17:58:11,533 INFO  [io.qua.oid.dep.dev.key.KeycloakDevConsolePostHandler] (security-openid-connect-quickstart-dev.jar) (DEV Console action) Test token: eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsInR5cCIgOiAiSldUIiwia2lkIiA6ICJ6Z2tDazJQZ1JaYnVlVG5kcTFKSW1sVnNoZ2hhbWhtbnBNcXU0QUt5MnJBIn0.ey...
2021-07-19 17:58:11,536 INFO  [io.qua.oid.dep.dev.key.KeycloakDevConsolePostHandler] (security-openid-connect-quickstart-dev.jar) (DEV Console action) Sending token to 'http://localhost:8080/api/admin'
2021-07-19 17:58:11,674 INFO  [io.qua.oid.dep.dev.key.KeycloakDevConsolePostHandler] (security-openid-connect-quickstart-dev.jar) (DEV Console action) Result: 200
----

A token is acquired from Keycloak using a `password` grant and is sent to the service endpoint.

==== Client Credentials Grant

If you set `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.grant.type=client` then a `client_credentials` grant will be used to acquire a token, with the page showing no `User` field in this case:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-client-credentials-grant.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Keycloak Page - Client Credentials Grant,role="center"].

You can test the service the same way as with the `Password` grant.

=== Developing OpenId Connect Web App Applications

If you develop a link:security-openid-connect-web-authentication[Quarkus OIDC web-app application] then you should set `quarkus.oidc.application-type=web-app` in `application.properties` before starting the application.

You will see a screen like this one:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-sign-in-to-service.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Keycloak Sign In,role="center"]

Set a relative service endpoint path, click on `Sign In To Service` and you will be redirected to Keycloak to enter a username and password in a new browser tab and get a response from the Quarkus application.

=== Keycloak Initialization

You do not need to configure `quarkus-oidc-keycloak` to start developing your Quarkus Keycloak `OIDC` applications with the only exception being that `quarkus.oidc.application-type=web-app` has to be set in `application.properties` to give the `Keycloak` page a hint it needs to show an option to `Sign In To Service`.

By default, the `quarkus`, `quarkus-app` client with a `secret` password, `alice` and `bob` users (with the passwords matching the names), and `user` and `admin` roles are created, with `alice` given both `admin` and `user` roles and `bob` - the `user` role. 

Usernames, secrets and their roles can be customized with `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.users` (the map which contains usernames and secrets) and `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.roles` (the map which contains user names and comma separated role values).

`quarkus.oidc.client-id` and `quarkus.oidc.credentials.secret` can be used to customize the client id and secret.

However it is likely your Keycloak configuration may be more complex and require setting more properties.

This is why `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.realm-path` is always checked first before trying to initialize Keycloak with the default or configured realm, client, user and roles properties. If the realm file exists on the file system or classpath then only this realm will be used to initialize Keycloak.

Also the Keycloak page offers an option to `Sign In To Keycloak To Configure Realms` using a `Keycloak Admin` option in the right top corner:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-admin.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Keycloak Page - Keycloak Admin,role="center"].

Sign in to Keycloak as `admin:admin` in order to further customize the realm properties or create a new realm, export the realm and have Keycloak initialized with the custom realm after a restart.

Note that even if you initialize Keycloak from a realm file, it is still needed to set the `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.realm-name` property for `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` to be calculated correctly. Setting the `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.users` property is needed if a `password` grant is used to acquire the tokens to test the OIDC `service` applications.

== Disable Dev Services for Keycloak

`Dev Services For Keycloak` will not be activated if either `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` is already initialized or the defaut OIDC tenant is disabled with `quarkus.oidc.tenant.enabled=false`, irrespectively of whether you work with Keycloak or not.

If you prefer not to have a `Dev Services for Keycloak` container started or do not work with Keycloak then you can also disable this feature with `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.enabled=false` - it will only be necessary if you expect to start `quarkus:dev` without `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url`.

The main Dev UI page will include an empty `OpenId Connect Card` when `Dev Services for Keycloak` is disabled:

image::dev-ui-oidc-card.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Card,role="center"]

== Dev Services Support for other OpenId Connect Providers

Your custom extension would need to extend `quarkus-oidc` only and add the dependencies required to support your provider to the extension's `deployment` module only.

The build step dealing with the `Dev Services` should additionally register two runtime properties into the "io.quarkus.quarkus-oidc" namespace: `oidcProviderName` (for example, `Google`) and `oidcProviderUrlBase` (for example: `mycompany.devservices-google`) for the `OpenId Connect Card` to link to the Dev UI page representing your provider, for example:

[source,shell]
----
package io.quarkus.oidc.okta.runtime;

import java.util.function.Supplier;

import io.quarkus.runtime.annotations.Recorder;

// This simple recorder is the only code which will be located in the extension's `runtime` module
@Recorder
public class OktaDevServicesRecorder {

    public Supplier<String> getProviderName() {
        return new Supplier<String>() {

            @Override
            public String get() {
                return "OKTA";
            }
        };
    }

    public Supplier<String> getProviderUrlBase() {
        return new Supplier<String>() {

            @Override
            public String get() {
                return "io.quarkus" + "." + "quarkus-oidc-okta";
            }
        };
    }
}


package io.quarkus.oidc.okta.deployment.devservices;

import static io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.ExecutionTime.RUNTIME_INIT;

import java.util.Optional;

import io.quarkus.deployment.IsDevelopment;
import io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.BuildProducer;
import io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.BuildStep;
import io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.Consume;
import io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.Record;
import io.quarkus.deployment.builditem.RuntimeConfigSetupCompleteBuildItem;
import io.quarkus.devconsole.spi.DevConsoleRouteBuildItem;
import io.quarkus.devconsole.spi.DevConsoleRuntimeTemplateInfoBuildItem;

public class OktaDevConsoleProcessor {

    @BuildStep(onlyIf = IsDevelopment.class)
    @Record(value = RUNTIME_INIT)
    public void setOidcProviderProperties(BuildProducer<DevConsoleRuntimeTemplateInfoBuildItem> provider,
            OktaDevServicesRecorder recorder,
            Optional<DevServicesConfigBuildItem> configProps) {
        if (configProps.isPresent()) {
            provider.produce(new DevConsoleRuntimeTemplateInfoBuildItem("io.quarkus", "quarkus-oidc", "oidcProviderName",
                    recorder.getProviderName()));
            provider.produce(new DevConsoleRuntimeTemplateInfoBuildItem("io.quarkus", "quarkus-oidc", "oidcProviderUrlBase",
                    recorder.getProviderUrlBase()));
        }
    }
}

----

Additionally, the extension should produce a `io.quarkus.oidc.deployment.devservices.OidcProviderBuildItem` to disable the default `Dev Services for Keycloak`, instead of the users having to type `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.enabled=false`.

Please follow the link:dev-ui[Dev UI] tutorial as well as check the `extensions/oidc/deployment` sources for more ideas.

== References

* link:dev-ui[Dev UI]
* https://www.keycloak.org/documentation.html[Keycloak Documentation]
* https://openid.net/connect/[OpenID Connect]
* link:security-openid-connect[Quarkus - Using OpenID Connect to Protect Service Applications using Bearer Token Authorization]
* link:security-openid-connect-web-authentication[Quarkus - Using OpenID Connect to Protect Web Applications using Authorization Code Flow]
* link:security[Quarkus Security]

Commit message:

Update Keycloak DevConsole to use the authorization code grant by default

docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-openid-connect-dev-services.adoc, after:

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Dev Services for OpenId Connect

include::./attributes.adoc[]

This guide covers the Dev Services for OpenId Connect Keycloak provider and explains how to support other OpenId Connect providers.

== Introduction

Quarkus introduces an experimental `Dev Services For Keycloak` feature which is enabled by default when the `quarkus-oidc` extension is started in dev mode. It starts a Keycloak container and initializes it by registering the existing Keycloak realm or creating a new realm with the client and users for you to start developing your Quarkus application secured by Keycloak immediately. It will restart a container when the `application.properties` or the realm file changes have been detected.

Additionally, link:dev-ui[Dev UI] available at http://localhost:8080/q/dev[/q/dev] supports this feature with a Keycloak specific page which helps to acquire the tokens from Keycloak and test your Quarkus application.

== Dev Services for Keycloak

Start your application without configuring `quarkus.oidc` properties in `application.properties`. You will see in the console something similar to:

[source,shell]
----
$ mvn quarkus:dev

2021-06-04 16:22:47,175 INFO  [🐳 .io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0]] (build-38) Creating container for image: quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0
2021-06-04 16:22:47,243 INFO  [🐳 .io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0]] (build-38) Starting container with ID: 6469f6db9cec2c855fcc6c8db4273944cc9d69e8f6803a0b47eb2d5b8f5b94fd
2021-06-04 16:22:47,629 INFO  [🐳 .io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0]] (build-38) Container quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0 is starting: 6469f6db9cec2c855fcc6c8db4273944cc9d69e8f6803a0b47eb2d5b8f5b94fd
2021-06-04 16:22:47,643 INFO  [org.tes.con.wai.str.HttpWaitStrategy] (build-38) /elastic_lovelace: Waiting for 60 seconds for URL: http://localhost:32812/auth (where port 32812 maps to container port 8080)
2021-06-04 16:23:07,665 INFO  [🐳 .io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0]] (build-38) Container quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0 started in PT5.500489S
...
2021-06-04 16:23:11,155 INFO  [io.quarkus] (Quarkus Main Thread) security-openid-connect-quickstart 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT on JVM (powered by Quarkus 999-SNAPSHOT) started in 25.968s. Listening on: http://localhost:8080
2021-06-04 16:23:11,157 INFO  [io.quarkus] (Quarkus Main Thread) Profile dev activated. Live Coding activated.
----

The `quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:14.0.0` Keycloak image is used by default to start a container. `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.image-name` can be used to change the Keycloak image used.

Now open the main Dev UI page and you will see the `OpenId Connect Card` linking to a `Keycloak` page:

image::dev-ui-oidc-keycloak-card.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Card,role="center"]

Click on the `Provider: Keycloak` link and you will see a Keycloak page which will be presented slightly differently depending on how `Dev Services for Keycloak` feature has been configured.

=== Testing Service Applications

By default the Keycloak page can be used to support the development of a link:security-openid-connect[Quarkus OIDC service application].

==== Authorization Code Grant

If you set `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.grant.type=code` in `applicatin.properties` (this is a default value) then an `authorization_code` grant will be used to acquire both access and ID tokens. Using this grant is recommended to emulate a typical flow where a `Single Page Application` acquires the tokens and uses them to access Quarkus services.

First you will see an option to `Log into Single Page Application`:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-sign-in-to-spa.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Keycloak Page - Log into Single Page Application,role="center"].

Next, after you select this option, you will be redirected to Keycloak to authenticate, example, as `alice:alice` and then returned to the page representing the SPA:  

image::dev-ui-keycloak-test-service-from-spa.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Keycloak Single Page Application,role="center"].

Here you can test the service with either the access token or ID token (note that the ID token will be sent as a regular bearer token).

Finally you can click a `Logged in` option if you'd like to log out and authenticate to Keycloak as a different user.

==== Implicit Grant

If you set `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.grant.type=implicit` in `applicatin.properties` then an `implicit` grant will be used to acquire both access and ID tokens. Use this grant for emulating a `Single Page Application` only if the authorization code grant does not work (for example, a client is configured in Keycloak to support an implicit grant, etc).

==== Password Grant

If you set `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.grant.type=password` in `applicatin.properties` then you will see a screen like this one:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-password-grant.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Keycloak Page - Password Grant,role="center"]

Enter a registered user name, a relative service endpoint path, click on `Test Service` and you will see a status code such as `200`, `403`, `401` or `404` printed.

You will also see in the Dev UI console something similar to:

[source,shell]
----
2021-07-19 17:58:11,407 INFO  [io.qua.oid.dep.dev.key.KeycloakDevConsolePostHandler] (security-openid-connect-quickstart-dev.jar) (DEV Console action) Using password grant to get a token from 'http://localhost:32818/auth/realms/quarkus/protocol/openid-connect/token' for user 'alice' in realm 'quarkus' with client id 'quarkus-app'
2021-07-19 17:58:11,533 INFO  [io.qua.oid.dep.dev.key.KeycloakDevConsolePostHandler] (security-openid-connect-quickstart-dev.jar) (DEV Console action) Test token: eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsInR5cCIgOiAiSldUIiwia2lkIiA6ICJ6Z2tDazJQZ1JaYnVlVG5kcTFKSW1sVnNoZ2hhbWhtbnBNcXU0QUt5MnJBIn0.ey...
2021-07-19 17:58:11,536 INFO  [io.qua.oid.dep.dev.key.KeycloakDevConsolePostHandler] (security-openid-connect-quickstart-dev.jar) (DEV Console action) Sending token to 'http://localhost:8080/api/admin'
2021-07-19 17:58:11,674 INFO  [io.qua.oid.dep.dev.key.KeycloakDevConsolePostHandler] (security-openid-connect-quickstart-dev.jar) (DEV Console action) Result: 200
----

A token is acquired from Keycloak using a `password` grant and is sent to the service endpoint.

==== Client Credentials Grant

If you set `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.grant.type=client` then a `client_credentials` grant will be used to acquire a token, with the page showing no `User` field in this case:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-client-credentials-grant.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Keycloak Page - Client Credentials Grant,role="center"].

You can test the service the same way as with the `Password` grant.

=== Developing OpenId Connect Web App Applications

If you develop a link:security-openid-connect-web-authentication[Quarkus OIDC web-app application] then you should set `quarkus.oidc.application-type=web-app` in `application.properties` before starting the application.

You will see a screen like this one:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-sign-in-to-service.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Keycloak Sign In,role="center"]

Set a relative service endpoint path, click on `Sign In To Service` and you will be redirected to Keycloak to enter a username and password in a new browser tab and get a response from the Quarkus application.

=== Keycloak Initialization

You do not need to configure `quarkus-oidc-keycloak` to start developing your Quarkus Keycloak `OIDC` applications with the only exception being that `quarkus.oidc.application-type=web-app` has to be set in `application.properties` to give the `Keycloak` page a hint it needs to show an option to `Sign In To Service`.

By default, the `quarkus`, `quarkus-app` client with a `secret` password, `alice` and `bob` users (with the passwords matching the names), and `user` and `admin` roles are created, with `alice` given both `admin` and `user` roles and `bob` - the `user` role. 

Usernames, secrets and their roles can be customized with `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.users` (the map which contains usernames and secrets) and `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.roles` (the map which contains user names and comma separated role values).

`quarkus.oidc.client-id` and `quarkus.oidc.credentials.secret` can be used to customize the client id and secret.

However it is likely your Keycloak configuration may be more complex and require setting more properties.

This is why `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.realm-path` is always checked first before trying to initialize Keycloak with the default or configured realm, client, user and roles properties. If the realm file exists on the file system or classpath then only this realm will be used to initialize Keycloak.

Also the Keycloak page offers an option to `Sign In To Keycloak To Configure Realms` using a `Keycloak Admin` option in the right top corner:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-admin.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Keycloak Page - Keycloak Admin,role="center"].

Sign in to Keycloak as `admin:admin` in order to further customize the realm properties or create a new realm, export the realm and have Keycloak initialized with the custom realm after a restart.

Note that even if you initialize Keycloak from a realm file, it is still needed to set the `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.realm-name` property for `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` to be calculated correctly. Setting the `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.users` property is needed if a `password` grant is used to acquire the tokens to test the OIDC `service` applications.

== Disable Dev Services for Keycloak

`Dev Services For Keycloak` will not be activated if either `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` is already initialized or the defaut OIDC tenant is disabled with `quarkus.oidc.tenant.enabled=false`, irrespectively of whether you work with Keycloak or not.

If you prefer not to have a `Dev Services for Keycloak` container started or do not work with Keycloak then you can also disable this feature with `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.enabled=false` - it will only be necessary if you expect to start `quarkus:dev` without `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url`.

The main Dev UI page will include an empty `OpenId Connect Card` when `Dev Services for Keycloak` is disabled:

image::dev-ui-oidc-card.png[alt=Dev UI OpenId Connect Card,role="center"]

== Dev Services Support for other OpenId Connect Providers

Your custom extension would need to extend `quarkus-oidc` only and add the dependencies required to support your provider to the extension's `deployment` module only.

The build step dealing with the `Dev Services` should additionally register two runtime properties into the "io.quarkus.quarkus-oidc" namespace: `oidcProviderName` (for example, `Google`) and `oidcProviderUrlBase` (for example: `mycompany.devservices-google`) for the `OpenId Connect Card` to link to the Dev UI page representing your provider, for example:

[source,shell]
----
package io.quarkus.oidc.okta.runtime;

import java.util.function.Supplier;

import io.quarkus.runtime.annotations.Recorder;

// This simple recorder is the only code which will be located in the extension's `runtime` module
@Recorder
public class OktaDevServicesRecorder {

    public Supplier<String> getProviderName() {
        return new Supplier<String>() {

            @Override
            public String get() {
                return "OKTA";
            }
        };
    }

    public Supplier<String> getProviderUrlBase() {
        return new Supplier<String>() {

            @Override
            public String get() {
                return "io.quarkus" + "." + "quarkus-oidc-okta";
            }
        };
    }
}


package io.quarkus.oidc.okta.deployment.devservices;

import static io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.ExecutionTime.RUNTIME_INIT;

import java.util.Optional;

import io.quarkus.deployment.IsDevelopment;
import io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.BuildProducer;
import io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.BuildStep;
import io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.Consume;
import io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.Record;
import io.quarkus.deployment.builditem.RuntimeConfigSetupCompleteBuildItem;
import io.quarkus.devconsole.spi.DevConsoleRouteBuildItem;
import io.quarkus.devconsole.spi.DevConsoleRuntimeTemplateInfoBuildItem;

public class OktaDevConsoleProcessor {

    @BuildStep(onlyIf = IsDevelopment.class)
    @Record(value = RUNTIME_INIT)
    public void setOidcProviderProperties(BuildProducer<DevConsoleRuntimeTemplateInfoBuildItem> provider,
            OktaDevServicesRecorder recorder,
            Optional<DevServicesConfigBuildItem> configProps) {
        if (configProps.isPresent()) {
            provider.produce(new DevConsoleRuntimeTemplateInfoBuildItem("io.quarkus", "quarkus-oidc", "oidcProviderName",
                    recorder.getProviderName()));
            provider.produce(new DevConsoleRuntimeTemplateInfoBuildItem("io.quarkus", "quarkus-oidc", "oidcProviderUrlBase",
                    recorder.getProviderUrlBase()));
        }
    }
}

----

Additionally, the extension should produce a `io.quarkus.oidc.deployment.devservices.OidcProviderBuildItem` to disable the default `Dev Services for Keycloak`, instead of the users having to type `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.enabled=false`.

Please follow the link:dev-ui[Dev UI] tutorial as well as check the `extensions/oidc/deployment` sources for more ideas.

== References

* link:dev-ui[Dev UI]
* https://www.keycloak.org/documentation.html[Keycloak Documentation]
* https://openid.net/connect/[OpenID Connect]
* link:security-openid-connect[Quarkus - Using OpenID Connect to Protect Service Applications using Bearer Token Authorization]
* link:security-openid-connect-web-authentication[Quarkus - Using OpenID Connect to Protect Web Applications using Authorization Code Flow]
* link:security[Quarkus Security]
